Ba et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabn0756 (2022)     9 September 2022
SCIENCE ADVANCES |  RESEARCH ARTICLE
8 of 13
genes. We also found that coevolution of expression layers is strong 
and prevalent across gene classes. In our results, the global proteome 
variability is comparable to or even slightly higher than the tran-
scriptome level across species (see Fig. 5A and fig. S10), emphasiz-
ing the evolution of lineage adaptions, rather than the genome-wide 
compensatory evolution (2), at the proteome level. Processes such 
as negative regulation of G protein–coupled receptor signaling and 
mRNA methylation, as examples that can be extracted from table 
S4, seem to show a higher variability at the protein level than at the 
RNA level. In addition, our data further suggest that the involve-
ment in protein complexes or protein-protein interactions presents 
additional constraints potentially reducing the transcriptome-  
proteome coevolution.
The biological variabilities between individuals and between 
species jointly shape the biological diversity on Earth. Our data ad-
dressed two principles underlying biodiversity. The first principle is 
that the proteome largely reflects variability at the transcriptional 
level. As shown in Fig. 3A, gene expression variabilities at mRNA 
and corresponding protein levels are overall tightly controlled with-
in classes of genes of the same molecular functions. Extracellular 
matrix proteins overall show a very high evolvability. The dynamics 
of gene products participating in the extracellular matrix might ren-
der each mammalian species a rapid environment adaptive response. 
In contrast, the expression of proteasome components seems to be 
evolutionarily conserved as reported (33). According to our data, 
the tight expression regulation is already detectable at the transcrip-
tional level, probably due to the high cost of protein synthesis (46). 
Accordingly, the translation-relevant gene expressions are particu-
larly stabilized at the protein level across species (Fig. 3A). This re-
inforces the previous finding that translation efficiency profile is 
highly conserved in evolution (47).
In a mammalian cell, the proteasome and lysosome represent 
the two major machineries for protein degradation (48). Previously, 
Ub-proteasome pathway was found to be evolutionarily conserved 
(33), but little is known about the evolutionary conservation of the 
lysosomal proteolysis pathway and the entire Ub system. We discov-
ered a much higher variability of the lysosomal degradation pathway. 
Considering that the endosome transportation–associated protein 
expressions are quite stable across species, our discovery might be 
associated with lysosomal exocytosis for remodeling extracellular 
proteins (49). Consistent to this finding, previous studies about the 
Ub code (50) suggested that K48-linked Ub, the most stable Ub 
codes we found here, is mainly involved in canonical protein degra-
dation via proteasome. In contrast, other lysine-linked Ubs carrying 
diverse functions, such as endocytosis and DNA damage responses 
(K63), were quantitatively more variable between species in our re-
sults. Even for proteasome itself, the immunoproteasome components 
such as PSME2 (11) manifested high interspecies variation than other 
proteasome components. Together, our data delineate a complex and 
manifold relationship between protein degradation and biodiversity.
The second principle underlying biodiversity at the molecular 
level is that proteome variability tends to be parallel at both the in-
dividual and species scales (Fig. 3B). Although it is expected that 
interspecies protein variability globally exceeds the interindividual 
variability, proteins in extracellular matrix and proteasome again 
showed the highest and the lowest variable abundances, respectively, 
also among humans. Functional classes such as mRNA splicing, mRNA 
metabolism, and cell division that showed exceptionally higher in-
terspecies variability are intriguing and warrant future investigations. 
For example, Keren et al. (51) have summarized various changing 
models of mRNA alternative splicing (AS) in different eukaryotic 
lineages. AS provides a strategy for relaxing negative selection pres-
sure against evolutionary change (52). In our data, the evolutionary 
variability of the AS pathway is strong at the protein level, which might 
enhance evolvability and proteotype diversity. The cell division–  
associated protein variability among mammals was further supported 
by phosphoproteomic data. Our cross-scale analysis represents a critical 
step toward comprehensive understanding of inherent protein ex-
pression variability. For many proteins such as those in and related 
to the extracellular matrix–mediated pathways, their expressions 
exhibit marked individual differences through intrinsic regulatory 
machineries, the evolutionary selective forces in speciation and 
phylogeny would prefer to just expand the magnitude of their intra-
specific protein diversity. For the other type of proteins, they are 
regulated particularly along the evolution axis, irrespective of their 
biological variability within species, such as RNA processing. It is 
thus essential to classify two types of protein variabilities for future 
evolutionary research.
Compared to early studies (53), our phosphoproteome data are 
fairly large in coverage and quantitative. Previously, little was known 
about the evolution of phosphorylation signaling networks. Our co-
variance analysis between P-sites provides a first coevolutionary 
phosphorylation network independent of protein levels. The enriched 
sequence motifs around the common P-sites pointed out similar 
kinases such as CDKs heavily evolving in mammalian evolution. We 
found the patterns of depleted glutamic acid (E) and enriching argi-
nine (R) residues around the common P-site. This result agrees well 
to our previous study that showed that such patterns tend to accel-
erate protein turnover when the P-sites get phosphorylated (20). 
Thus, the timely phosphoprotein turnover may render active selec-
tion on P-sites in mammalian evolution.
The present study only analyzed fibroblast cells, whereas enor-
mous single-cell and multitissue studies have demonstrated the 
complexity and diversity of gene expression among different cell types 
(14–16). Our datasets could provide additional broad impacts, be-
cause skin-derived fibroblast cells play an essential role during cuta-
neous wound healing and were used to discover different molecular 
traits associated with the longevity between different mammals and 
other species previously (54,  55), and skin fibroblasts are critical de-
terminants of skin cancer malignancy across species (56, 57). More-
over, cryobanking of fibroblast cells presents a national-wide tool 
that facilitates the biological diversity characterization and contrib-
utes to ex situ conservation of genetic resources (58). Although 
most of our conclusions, such as transcriptome-proteome coevolu-
tion and biological variability control, are unlikely to be limited to 
fibroblast cells, our results promisingly anchor future proteotype char-
acterization studies on other cell types and multiple tissues across 
species. In addition, the species differences of molecular events 
might be more apparent in studies of the disturbed or dynamic sys-
tems. Moreover, as already shown in studies analyzing protein turn-
over (9,  59), thermal stability (60), protein-protein interaction (61), 
and specific phosphorylation signaling process (62,  63), the MS-
based quantitative proteomic analysis across multiple species will 
provide additional insights into answering fundamental evolution-
ary questions and beyond. We expect the establishment of quantitative 
landscape of proteins and posttranslational modifications across spe-
cies to further contribute to our understanding of biological vari-
ability and biodiversity on Earth.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on August 19, 2025
