Ba et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabn0756 (2022)     9 September 2022
SCIENCE ADVANCES |  RESEARCH ARTICLE
4 of 13
among proteins, we found that correlated evolution of RNA and pro-
tein levels (e.g., R > 0.8 versus |R| < 0.2; Fig. 2B) is prevalent among pro-
teins with a low number of protein-protein interactions.
To discern the functional implications of gene expression vari-
ability, we calculated the SD for mRNA and protein levels among 
species (see Materials and Methods). By mapping SDs to a gene es-
sentiality database (26), we found that the expression levels of es-
sential or conditionally essential gene products tend to be much less 
variable during evolution than the expressions of nonessential 
genes (Fig. 2C). Likewise, haploinsufficient genes (27) are expressed 
with much more stable transcript and protein levels than other genes. 
Also, the newly evolved mammal-specific genes during evolution (i.e., 
“younger” genes) (28) show higher expression divergence among mam-
mals, especially at the protein level, than those of “older” eukaryote- 
specific genes (Fig. 2C and fig. S7A). Furthermore, secretory (29) 
and cell surface proteins (30) display much less stability between 
species compared to nonsecretory or proteins inside the cells, con-
sistent to their adaptable roles. A curated list of cancer biomarkers 
(31) also showed larger variability, indicating that these proteins might 
be prone to be dysregulated in disease states. Together, the interspe-
cies SD of mRNA and protein abundances provides an evolutionary 
angle to understand gene functional diversity.
To broadly map mRNA and protein species variability to gene 
functions in an unbiased manner, we used a two-dimensional (2D) 
enrichment plot (Fig. 3A) (32). Such a 2D plot essentially summa-
rizes gene classes expressed with either significantly more variable 
or stable transcript or protein levels, as compared to other classes. 
First, we found that most functional classes exhibit highly correlated 
mRNA and protein variabilities—when mRNA levels are variable, 
the protein concentrations also tend to be diverse across species and 
vice versa. This overall trend endorses the notion of strong coevo-
lution of transcriptome and proteome across gene classes (table S4 
and fig. S7B) (2). Second, among the gene classes, extracellular matrix– 
related genes have most variable expressions at both, the transcript 
and the protein levels (highlighted in blue, Fig. 3A). This agrees well 
with the role of extracellular matrix in interacting with the environment. 
On the other hand, the intracellular protein and phosphorylation 
removal systems such as the proteasome complex and the serine/
threonine phosphatase complexes showed the least variable con-
centrations among all functional classes. This may imply that those 
cell adaptive responses, correcting excessive protein copies (33) and 
abnormal phosphorylation (34), are evolutionarily conserved. Third, 
the gene categories with the most deviation from transcriptome- 
proteome coevolution are translation-related genes, especially genes 
involved in translational elongation and initiation, for which the 
protein quantitative variabilities are strongly buffered compared to 
that of mRNA. Last, we confirmed that the lower abundant tran-
scripts and proteins are not associated with functional categories 
that are more variable between mammalian species, strongly en-
dorsing that the above observations are independent of any intensity- 
associated effects (fig. S7, C and D). In summary, both PIC analysis 
and functional annotations demonstrate global coevolutionary dy-
namics between transcriptome and proteome levels across gene 
classes and among species, with deviating classes mainly due to the 
protein level buffering and protein-protein interaction constraints.
Biological variability analysis: Interindividual versus interspecies
How does evolutionary gene expression variability compare to vari-
ation at other scales? We here refer to a published dataset, part of 
which reported the proteome variability among 11 unrelated healthy 
human individuals by using the same cell type and DIA-MS tech-
nique (35). This comparison thus intriguingly presents an interspecies 
(n = 11) versus interindividual (n = 11) comparison of biodiversity. 
Combined PCA (see Materials and Methods) indicates that the 
global variability between mammalian species is naturally much 
larger than the variability between human individuals (fig. S7E). Be-
sides the extent of variation, proteins participating in any heteromeric 
protein complex [i.e., Complex_In, according to the annotation in 
the CORUM database (36)] exhibited significantly lower interindividual 
and interspecies SDs than other “Complex_Out” proteins (Fig. 2C, 
bottom two). This demonstrates the proteostasis control through protein 
complex stoichiometry, which was previously found posttranscrip-
tionally in many studies (35,  37–39). However, our data indicate 
that the mRNA variability in the Complex_In group is also notably 
lower than that of Complex_Out. The gene-gene correlation analysis 
demonstrates a consistent trend (fig. S3D). Hence, the evolutionary 
diversity might have already started to intensively regulate the transcript 
abundance toward protein-level usage of, e.g., protein complexes.
Next, we used a 2D enrichment plot (32) to illustrate the func-
tional convergence between interindividual diversity and interspe-
cies diversity at the proteome level (Fig. 3B). We found that, at both 
individual and species scales, the members of the proteasome com-
plex, again, manifest the lowest protein abundance variability, whereas 
the extracellular matrix proteins show the highest. Compared to the 
same items enriched in Fig. 3A, it is thus appealing to deduce that 
abundance control of the subcellular proteomes can extend over 
both scales of biodiversity (table S5 and fig. S7F). RNA processing and 
cell division pathways show a particular higher protein abundance 
variability at the interspecies scale than at the interindividual scale, 
indicating that these pathways play a particularly important role in 
mammalian evolution. In addition, at the mRNA level, a similar anal-
ysis suggests that while the most variable classes are again extracellular 
matrix related at both biodiversity scales, the most stable classes are 
RNA processing–associated pathways (fig. S8). Thus, during mam-
malian evolution, RNA processing and splicing, although stable 
between individuals, are tightly regulated at the protein level. To 
summarize, the interindividual and interspecies proteome variabil-
ities are in fact broadly correlated and function dependent.
Divergent evolutionary conservation for proteasome- 
and lysosome-mediated protein degradation
Because of the prominent conservation of proteasome expression 
between individuals and between species, we next sought to interro-
gate the interspecies stability of the general protein degradation 
machineries in the cell. We found that the transcript and protein 
abundance profiles of lysosomal hydrolases and ubiquitin (Ub) en-
zymes including both deubiquitylating enzymes (DUBs) and E3 Ub 
ligases demonstrate distinctly higher variabilities than the protea-
some components across both, individuals and species (Fig. 4A and 
fig. S9). Whereas the distribution of Ub enzyme levels is wide, the 
lysosomal proteases display an even higher protein expression di-
versity than the average level proteome wide (P = 5.38 × 10 −05; fig. S9). 
This result suggests that the lysosome-mediated degradation path-
way is fast evolving among mammals, despite proteasomal degrada-
tion is evolutionarily conserved. Only two proteasome proteins 
showed exceptional instability—proteasome 20S subunit alpha type-4 
(PSMA4) and proteasome activator complex subunit 2 (PSME2), 
the latter was implicated in immunoproteasome assembly (40). Many 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on August 19, 2025
