Ba et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabn0756 (2022)     9 September 2022
SCIENCE ADVANCES |  RESEARCH ARTICLE
5 of 13
lysosome hydrolases seem to be expressed lower in opossum than 
EAOG and LAUT species in which they become more variable. Certain 
DUBs such as ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase 5 (USP5), USP7, 
USP8, USP14, and USP47 are as conserved as proteasome core subunits, 
whereas USP19 and USP48 are quite dynamic among mammals. A 
summary network analysis not only reinforces similar rates of mRNA 
and protein divergence in these cellular protein removal processes 
but also reveals that a few Ub enzymes such as the deubiquitinating 
protein VCPIP1 (valosin containing protein interacting protein 1), the 
ubiquitin thioesterase (OTU deubiquitinase with linear linkage 
specificity), and the E3 ubiquitin- protein ligases XIAP (X-linked 
inhibitor of apoptosis) , and TRIP12 (thyroid hormone receptor 
interactor 12) underwent extensive posttranscriptional regulation 
during evolution (Fig. 4B). We additionally checked that the CVs of 
experimental replicates for all the above proteins, confirming the bi-
ological variability between the functional classes, are not associated 
with any measurement bias (P = 0.335; Fig. 4C).
To corroborate these results, we performed an independent Ub 
modification search (41), to focus on Ub chains with specific Ub 
chain linkage to different lysine (K) residues. We were able to detect 
the signature peptides representing modified lysine positions in Ub, 
including K11, K27, K48, and K63, successfully among all species 
with the modified representative peptides (see Materials and Meth-
ods). For the most abundant K48 and K63 DIA-MS signals, we used 
an unmodified peptide between K48 and K63 peptide sequences as 
a normalization reference. The relative comparison suggests that the 
K48-linked Ub chains harbor a smaller cross-species variability than 
K63 chains (CV 27.2% versus 77.4%; Fig. 4D). Because of the canoni-
cal role of K48 polyUb chains in proteasome-mediated degradation 
and the diverse signaling roles of K63, the Ub modification search-
ing effort agrees well to the above variability analysis.
Common and covarying phosphoproteomic signatures 
across mammalian species
To interrogate how phosphoproteomics could shed light on molec-
ular evolution, we first evaluated cross-species SDs among transcripts, 
proteins, and phosphoproteins. We found that P-sites are molecularly 
much more dynamic than mRNAs and proteins (P < 2.2 × 10 −16 ; 
Fig. 5A and fig. S10). In addition, the protein abundance “regressed out” 
P-site values (or P-site_reg) (42) are still credibly higher (P < 2.2 × 
10−16), indicating that phosphoproteomes captured activity dynamics 
that is not reflected by transcript and protein abundances. Follow-
ing, we focused on the 611 P-sites that were aligned across 11 spe-
cies (hereafter, common P-sites). Compared to all the other P-sites, 
we detected that, in human, the common P-sites are predicted with 
an overall lower “sift_ala_score,” a computational score predicting 
the system tolerance if the P-site residue is mutated to alanine (P = 
6.6 × 10−12 ; Fig. 5B) (43,  44). Besides, the common P-sites exhibit a 
noteworthy higher functional fitness score (43) than other P-sites 
(P = 3.6 × 10 −10). Moreover, by mapping to a dataset reporting P-site– 
specific melting temperature (Tm) (45), we found a small but signif-
icant difference, indicating that the common P-sites may bring more 
structural thermal stability to proteins than other P-sites (P = 3.5 × 
10−4 ). These results supported the conservative and essential role of 
common P-sites in evolution and organismal fitness. As for se-
quence features, the frequency of amino acids surrounding all the 
common P-sites revealed a diverse amino acid distribution and en-
riched for a few signature motifs (Fig. 5, C and D). These motifs, such 
as (SP), (SP.R), and (R..S), can potentially match to the substrate motifs 
of, e.g., cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) and calmodulin-dependent 
protein kinase or protein kinase A. Last, a relative amino acid fre-
quency comparison to human background revealed notable deple-
tion of glutamic acid (E) and enrichment of arginine (R) and serine 
Extracellular region
Protein complex
Protein transport
Extracellular space
RNA metabolic process
Extracellular matrix
Cytosol
RNA processing
Nucleobase compound metabolism
Endosome transport
Protein modification 
by conjugation
Localization
Vesicle
Cell cycle
transport
Mitotic cell cycle
Ribonucleoprotein complex assembly
Nitrogen compound metabolic process
mRNA processing
mRNA metabolism
Nucleus
Proteasome complex
Organic acid metabolic process
Cellular ketone metabolic process
Amine metabolic process
Viral reproduction
RNA splicing
Response to endogenous stimulus
Lipid metabolic process
Proteolysis in 
catabolic process
Vesicle organization
rRNA processing
Protein metabolic process
cytoplasm
Endosome
Cell adhesion
Small-molecule metabolic process
Translation
Organelle organization
Macromolecular
complex assembly
Heterocycle
metabolism
Cell division
proteolysis
Ribonucleoprotein complex
0.0025
0.0050
0.0075
P value
Size
100
300
500
−0.6
−0.3
0.0
0.3
0.6
−0.6 −0.3 0.30 .60.0
Protein SD score (11 species)
Protein SD score (11 human individuals)
Extracellular structure organization
Protein transport
Extracellular region
Protein complex
Extracellular space Extracellular structure
organization
Extracellular matrix
Transport
Endosome transport
Extracellular organelleVesicle
RNA metabolic process
Golgi vesicle transport
Cell adhesion
Lipid metabolic process
Translation
RNA processing
Translational 
elongation
Vesicle organization
Viral reproduction
Cellular component
organization
Nucleobase compound process
Protein serine/threonine
phosphatase complex
Cellular lipid metabolic process
Small-molecule metabolic process
Endosome
Protein metabolic process
Cytoskeleton
Polysaccharide 
metabolic process
Multicellular organismal process
Cytoplasm
Plasma membrane Mitochondrial
Proteasome complex
Anatomical structure development
Ribonucleoprotein 
complex assembly
Macromolecule metabolic process
Translational initiation
−0.6
−0.3
0.0
0.3
0.6
RNA SD score (11 species)
Protein SD score (11 species)
Size
200
400
600
0.0025
0.0050
0.0075
P value
 translation
−0.6 −0.3 0.0 0.3 0.6
AB
Fig. 3. Functional enrichment analysis revealing protein expression variability control at the posttranscriptional level and between the individual and species scales. (A) 2D en-
richment plot of SD selected GOBPs (gene ontology biological processes) or GOCCs (gene ontology cellular components). The axes denote enrichment scores for SD from the aver-
age at mRNA (x axis) and protein (y axis) levels across 11 species. (B) 2D enrichment plot of SD selected GOBPs or GOCCs denoting gene expression variability analysis across species 
and human individuals. The axes denote enrichment scores for the protein SD from average across 11 species (x axis) and 11 individuals (y axis). rRNA, ribosomal RNA.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on August 19, 2025
