variation across all 13 protein types. The frequency of SAPs differed by
protein type, as well as by taxon considered (i.e., taxonomic rank). As
expected, the highly structured collagen proteins had fewer amino
acid substitutions relative to length, while XCA1, OC116, Clusterin and
Ovocalyxin-32 were the most diverse relative to length. Although
intraspecies and interspecies variation was infrequent in many pro-
teins, this study demonstrates that when a suf ﬁcient number of sam-
ples are analysed, the observation of SAPs occurring between and
w i t h i ns p e c i e si sc o m m o n .
For OC116 we identi ﬁed 15 missense mutations within Anas pla-
tyrhynchos alone and determined that heterozygosity was present in
three out of seven individuals examined. DNA damage causes G-T or
C-A nucleotide mutations, which is often associated with low-
frequency variants (~1-5%)
42. But none of those observed in Anas pla-
tyrhynchos resulted from these substitutions, although the one
example of intraspecies variability we were able to examine for COL1a2
was the result of a poorly supported C-A SNP. Mutagenic damage, like
other sequencing and assembly errors, is an infrequent but persistent
issue in published genomic databases
33,42,43. While our results demon-
strate that most of the observed intraspecies protein variation is not an
artefact of sequencing or assembly, but is occurring at the biological
level, the evidence for variants caused by mutagenic damage empha-
sises the need for careful consideration of the SAPs chosen for taxo-
nomic discrimination. Given that some, if rare, intraspecies variation
does occur within collagen sequences of birds, as has been observed in
orangutans and hominins
28,30, the application of collagen peptide mass
ﬁngerprinting (ZooMS) to identify archaeological samples should also
consider this possibility when identifying biomarkers for taxonomic
determination, particularly if the aim is to distinguish closely related
groups. This is especially important for ﬁsh
21,25 and amphibians23 for
which interspeciﬁc variability is common. Crucially, our observation of
both intra- and interspecies variation in all annotated protein groups
complicates the standard assumption that SAPs observed between two
species or genera can be used for taxonomic identi ﬁcation or evolu-
tionary placement.
The observed intraspecies variation may have several biological
causes, among which frequent hybridization among Anatidae
44,45 and a
millennary history of human modiﬁcation and management of Anati-
dae populations46,47, which continues today at industrialised scales48,49,
certainly play a fundamental role. Variants in the genes involved in egg-
laying and reproduction in domesticated chicken and duck breeds are
known to produce changes in eggshell or reproductive traits, such as
egg shape and weight, and clutch size, and are often encouraged by
agricultural specialists today
50–57. Importantly, however, our observa-
tion of intraspecies variability across multiple orders of birds, includ-
ing paradise-crow, goshawk, bustard, pelican, whooping crane and
kagu, highlights the widespread nature of intraspecies protein varia-
tion among birds. Moreover, while most of the intraspecies variation
we observed occurs in eggshell proteins associated with reproduction,
many of these sequences have homologues in other animals, including
ovocalyxin-32 and OC116
58. Avian ovocleidin 116 is homologous to the
matrix extracellular phosphoglycoprotein (MEPE) in mammals that
plays a role in biomineralisation of bone
59. As of 18/04/2025, there are
at least 721 observed variants for Human MEPE on UniProt60 indicating
that this variation is not related speci ﬁcally to avian reproduction. If
intraspecies variation affects all organisms, then the answer to the
question “what level of taxonomic resolution can ancient proteins
offer?” needs to be carefully evaluated.
Evolutionary palaeoproteomics is perhaps the most exciting
avenue for reconstructing the history of life, as it is able to leverage the
genetic information encoded in ancient samples in which DNA is not
preserved. We conﬁrm that proteins describe divergences occurring in
deep time, e.g., between large orders of birds such as Galliformes
(landfowl), Anseriformes (waterfowl) and Columbiformes (pigeons
and doves)
13,19,61,62, all between 70 and 60 mya 32,a n df a m i l i e sl i k e
Phasianidae (pheasants, partridges) and Odontophoridae (New World
quails)13,19,63,w h i c hs e p a r a t e d3 7m y a32. Between-species relationships
f o rA n a t i d a eh a v en o ty e tb e e nr e s o l v e db yg e n o m e - w i d es t u d i e s .
Multiple phylogenies are available based on mitochondrial genes or
mitogenomes, which differ in topology
34,35,44,64.H e r ew ec o m p a r eo u r
protein-based phylogenies to Sun et al.34,w h o s em i t o c h o n d r i a lg e n e -
based tree contains the most comparable range of species to our
study. Our concatenated protein-based phylogeny of 13 nuclear-
encoded genes demonstrates high bootstrap support (>90) for
separating all genera (except Chenonetta). This includes recent diver-
gences, such as Lophonetta + Tachyeres (5.3 mya), and Amazonetta +
Speculanas (3.9 mya)
34. In general, the relationships between genera
are consistent with those presented by Sun et al. 34 with two major
differences. Our protein phylogeny placesCairinaand Aix in a separate
clade rather than as a sister branch toTadorna(diverging 12.5 mya) and
Chloephaga. Similarly, our tree places Oxyura outside of Anserinae,
inconsistent with the mitochondrial DNA tree (diverging 22.5 mya).
Tree topologies vary more between the protein and mitochondrial
DNA trees within genera, and species divergence is less well-supported
by bootstrap scores, especially where speciation occurred within the
last 2–3 million years (as estimated by Sun et al.
34).
The congruence between the mtDNA and protein trees highlights
the utility of protein sequences for encoding taxonomic information.
However, our tree is based on multiple proteins covering 5553 amino
acid positions, an amount of data that is unlikely to be generated
by most palaeoproteomic studies. Moreover, for practical applications
of palaeoproteomics it is important to note that proteins are
tissue speciﬁc (i.e., collagen is recovered from bone and not eggshell),
and degraded. Therefore, the utility of proteins for taxonomic
identiﬁcation changes according to substrate type and extent of
molecular preservation. Nonetheless, multiple lines of evidence, such
as morphology and species distributions, can be integrated to narrow
down taxonomic identiﬁcations, and through rigorous assessment of
phylogenetically informative SAPs in bone collagen and eggshell pro-
teins, palaeoproteomic applications can signi ﬁcantly improve our
ability to identify avian species from fragmentary remains. We
demonstrate this point by applying these reference sequences (dataset
2) to reevaluate ancient protein data from two previous studies that
failed to identify archaeological avian remains below the family or
genus level.
The data from two archaeological sites, Tlajinga, Teotihuacan
(Mexico) and Shubayqa (Jordan), now give us a ﬁne-grained picture of
complex human-environment relationships in the past. Codlin et al.
19
published a large-scale application of ZooMS to avifaunal bone from
Teotihuacan city, Mexico (200 BCE − 600 CE). They revealed a high
diversity of aquatic birds consumed in the city, including four groups
of archaeological specimens that were only able to be identi ﬁed to
family level (Anatidae). We reevaluated the four specimens repre-
sentative of these groups, for which both LC-MS/MS and MALDI-TOF
MS data was available, and used dataset 2 to re ﬁne identiﬁcations,
relying on SAPs that are observed consistently across multiple indivi-
duals from the taxonomic groups concerned: widgeon ( Mareca sp.),
pintail ( Anas acuta ), ruddy duck ( Oxyura jamaicensis)a n dal a r g e
group which could include multiple Anatini genera and Aythya (Sup-
plementary Note 3). The diversity of ducks alongside the other aquatic
birds mirrors that of earlier lakeside communities
65, suggesting that
the residents likely had direct access to the lake resources and targeted
shallow waters with open grasslands and marshy areas with standing
vegetation
66. At Teotihuacan, this approach provides an improved
means to identify lake exploitation practices, evidence for which has
been tantalisingly scarce67,68.
Yeomans et al. 69 presented peptide biomarkers for the identi ﬁ-
cation of Anatidae eggshell and demonstrated the presence of a year-
round wetland during the Pleistocene-Holocene transition at the site of
Shubayqa in Eastern Jordan. They identiﬁed swan (Cygnus) and goose
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63886-1
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:8820 7