 
Revised May 3rd, 2019 
Brief guide for submission to Nature Communications 
 
This guide outlines key points for preparing primary research 
manuscripts for submission to Nature Communications.  
The corresponding author should be familiar with the Nature 
journals’ editorial policies and is solely responsible for communicating 
with the journal and managing communication between coauthors. 
Before submission, the corresponding author ensures that all authors are 
included in the author list and agree with its order, and that they are 
aware the manuscript is to be submitted. For more information on 
editorial and authorship policies please review our Guide to Authors. 
Cover letter 
Although optional, the cover letter is an excellent opportunity to briefly 
discuss the context and importance of the submitted work and why it is 
appropriate for the journal. Please avoid repeating information that is 
already present in the abstract and introduction. The cover letter is not 
shared with the referees, and should be used to provide confidential 
information, such as conflicts of interest, and to declare any related 
work that is in press or submitted elsewhere. 
Main manuscript 
The Nature journals are flexible with regard to the format of initial 
submissions. Within reason, style and length will not influence 
consideration of a manuscript. If revisions are requested, the editor will 
provide detailed formatting instructions at that time. For information on 
length and formatting consult Nature Communications' content types. 
Title. If possible, this should be 15 words or fewer and should not 
contain technical terms, abbreviations, punctuation and active verbs. 
Authors. Corresponding author(s) should be identified with an asterisk.  
Abstract. Provide a general introduction to the topic and a brief non-
technical summary of your main results and their implication.   
Text length and formatting. Attention to the following details can help 
expedite publication if we invite a revision after external review. 
• Articles: an abstract of approximately 150 words, unreferenced; 
main text of no more than 5,000 words and 10 display items 
(figures, tables). As a guideline, Articles allow up to 70 references. 
Section headings should be used and subheadings should appear in 
'Results' and ‘Methods’. 
Methods. The Methods section appears in all online original research 
articles and should contain all elements necessary for interpretation and 
replication of the results. Methods should be written as concisely as 
possible and typically do not exceed 3,000 words but may be longer if 
necessary. We encourage you to deposit any step-by-step protocols used 
in your study in Protocol Exchange, an open resource maintained by 
NPG. These protocols are linked to the Methods section upon 
publication. 
References. These may only contain citations and should list only one 
publication with each number. Include the title of the cited article or 
dataset. 
Acknowledgements (optional). Keep acknowledgements brief and do 
not include thanks to anonymous referees or editors, or effusive 
comments. Grant or contribution numbers may be acknowledged. 
Author contributions. You must include a statement that specifies the 
individual contributions of each co-author. For example: "A.P.M. 
‘contributed’ Y and Z; B.T.R. ‘contributed’ Y,” etc. See our authorship 
policies for more details. 
Competing interests. Submission of a competing interests statement is 
required for all content of the journal. 
Materials & Correspondence. Indicate the author(s) to whom 
correspondence and material requests should be addressed. 
Tables. Each table should be prepared using the Table menu in Word or 
the table environment in TeX/LaTeX and accompanied by a short title 
sentence describing what the table shows. Further details can be 
included as footnotes to the table. 
Figures   
High-resolution image files are not required at initial submission, but 
please ensure that images are of sufficient resolution for referees to 
properly assess the data.   
   Should your manuscript be accepted, you will receive more extensive 
instructions for final submission of display items. However, some 
guidelines for final figure preparation are included below and here if 
you wish to minimize later revisions and possible delays. 
• Provide images in RGB color and at 300 dpi or higher resolution. 
• Use the same typeface (Arial or Helvetica) for all figures. Use 
symbol font for Greek letters. 
• Use distinct colors with comparable visibility and avoid the use of 
red and green for contrast. Recoloring primary data, such as 
fluorescence images, to color-safe combinations such as green and 
magenta or other accessible color palettes is strongly encouraged. 
Use of the rainbow color scale should be avoided. 
• Figures are best prepared at the size you would expect them to 
appear in print. At this size, the optimum font size is between 5pt 
and 8pt. 
• We prefer vector files with editable layers. Acceptable formats are: 
.ai, .eps, .pdf, .ps and .svg for fully editable vector-based art; 
layered .psd and .tif for editable layered art; .psd, .tif, .png and .jpg 
for bitmap images; .ppt if fully editable and without styling effects; 
ChemDraw (.cdx) for chemical structures.   
• Please use the Nature Research Chemical Structures Guide and 
ChemDraw template for formatting of chemical structures. 
 
Figure legends should be <350 words each. They should begin with a 
brief title sentence for the whole figure and continue with a short 
statement of what is depicted in the figure, not the results (or data) of 
the experiment or the methods used. Legends should be detailed enough 
so that each figure and caption can, as far as possible, be understood in 
isolation from the main text. 
Statistical information 
Comprehensive information on the statistical analyses used must be 
included in the paper. The Methods must include a statistics section 
where you describe the statistical tests used and whether they were one- 
or two-tailed. Please ensure that the error bars are defined throughout 
the figures. For all statistics (including error bars), provide the EXACT 
n values used to calculate the statistics (reporting individual values 
rather than a range if n varied among experiments). For representative 
results, report the number of times that the measurements were 
repeated. Where relevant, provide exact values for both significant and 
non-significant P values. For ANOVAs, provide F values and degrees 
of freedom. For t-tests, provide t-values and degrees of freedom. Please 
specifically define the replicates. 
Supplementary information 
Please submit supplementary figures, small tables and text as a single 
combined PDF document. Tables longer than one page should be 
provided as an Excel or similar file type. For optimal quality video files 
please use H.264 encoding, the standard aspect ratio of 16:9 (4:3 is 
second best) and do not compress the video. We encourage submission 
of step-by-step synthesis procedures for chemical compounds and data 
on compound characterization. Supplementary information is not copy-
edited, so please ensure that it is clearly and succinctly presented, and 
that the style and terminology conform to the rest of the manuscript.  
Data availability  
Please provide a data availability statement as a separate section after 
the Methods section but before the References, under the heading “Data 
Availability”; detailed guidance can be found in our data availability 
and data citations policy. Certain data types must be deposited in an 
appropriate public structured data depository (details are available here) 
and the accession number(s) provided in the manuscript. Full access is 
required at publication. Should full access to data be required for peer 
review, authors must provide it.  
   We encourage provision of other source data in unstructured public 
depositories such as Dryad or figshare, or as supplementary 
information. To maximize data reuse, we encourage publication of 
detailed descriptions of datasets in Scientific Data. 
 
Revised May 3rd, 2019 
Crystallographic data  
Manuscripts reporting new crystallographic structures of small 
molecules must be accompanied by a standard .cif file. A structural 
figure with probability ellipsoids should be included in the main 
supplementary information file. The structure factors for each structure 
should also be submitted, preferably embedded in the main .cif file, 
although they may be provided as a separate .hkl and/or .fcf file. Use of 
the latest version of the program SHELXL, which embeds the structure 
factors information in the main .cif file, is encouraged. The structure 
factors and structural output must be checked using IUCr's CheckCIF 
routine and a pdf copy of the output supplied, explaining any A- or B-
level alerts.  
Computer code  
Any previously unreported custom computer code used to generate 
results reported in the manuscript that are central to the main claims 
must be made available to editors and reviewers upon request. Any 
practical issues preventing code sharing will be evaluated by the editors 
who reserve the right to decline the manuscript if important code is 
unavailable. At publication, Nature journals consider it best practice to 
release custom computer code in a way that allows readers to repeat the 
published results. 
    Authors of such research papers will also be asked to fill out a code 
and software submission checklist that will be made available to editors 
and reviewers during manuscript assessment. The aim is to make 
studies that use such code more reliable by ensuring that all relevant 
documentation is available and by facilitating testing of software by the 
reviewers. Further detailed guidance and required documentation at 
submission and acceptance of the manuscript can be found here. 
    For all studies using custom code that is deemed central to the 
conclusions, a statement must be included under the heading "Code 
availability", indicating whether and how the code can be accessed, 
including any restrictions to access. Code availability statements should 
be provided as a separate section after the data availability statement but 
before the References. 
Reporting guidelines  
To improve the transparency of reporting and the reproducibility of 
published results, authors of life sciences, behavioural & social sciences 
and ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences research articles 
must provide a completed reporting summary that will be made 
available to editors and reviewers during manuscript assessment. The 
reporting summary will be published with all accepted manuscripts. 
Guidance and resources related to the use and reporting of statistics are 
available here. 
    All authors must also complete an editorial policy checklist to ensure 
compliance with Nature Research editorial policies. 
    Please note: because of the advanced features used in these forms, 
you must use Adobe Reader to open the documents and fill them out, 
instead of opening them in a web browser.     
Other reporting checklist  
To improve the transparency of reporting and the reproducibility of 
published results in certain other research areas, you may be asked to 
complete a different checklist and provide the requested information 
prior to peer review.  
Source data 
For relevant manuscripts, we may request a source data file in Microsoft 
Excel format or a zipped folder. The source data file should, as a 
minimum, contain the raw data underlying any graphs and charts, and 
uncropped versions of any gels or blots presented in the figures. Within 
the source data file, each figure or table (in the main manuscript and in 
the Supplementary Information) containing relevant data should be 
represented by a single sheet in an Excel document, or a single .txt file 
or other file type in a zipped folder. Blot and gel images should be 
pasted in and labelled with the relevant panel and identifying 
information such as the antibody used. We also encourage authors to 
include any other types of raw data that may be appropriate. An 
example source data file is available demonstrating the correct format. 
Human subject data  
If you are reporting phase II or phase III randomized controlled trials 
you must refer to the CONSORT Statement for recommendations to 
facilitate the complete and transparent reporting of trial findings. 
Reports that do not conform to the CONSORT guidelines may need to 
be revised before peer review. 
   We encourage authors reporting prognostic studies with tumor 
markers to follow the REMARK reporting guidelines. 
   Before the start of patient enrollment prospective clinical trials must 
be registered in www.clinicaltrials.gov or a similar public repository 
that matches ISMJE criteria and the trial registration number reported in 
the manuscript. (Trials in which the primary goal is to determine 
pharmacokinetics are exempt.) 
   For describing human biospecimens, we recommend referring to the 
BRISQ reporting guidelines and ensuring at least Tier 1 characteristics 
are provided (doi: 10.1002/cncy.20147). 
Related manuscripts 
It is a requirement of submission that you alert us to any related 
manuscripts with overlapping authorship that are under consideration 
(including under appeal) or in press at other journals (see our editorial 
policies on duplicate submissions for details). Copies of these 
manuscripts should be clearly marked and included as separate files 
with your submission. Abstracts or other unrefereed preprints do not 
compromise novelty.   
Preprint servers  
Nature Research journals support posting of primary research 
manuscripts on community preprint servers such as arXiv and bioRxiv.  
We do, however, ask you to respect our policies on posting, citation and 
licensing of preprints. 
Transparent peer review  
For published original research articles, the reviewer comments to the 
authors and the author rebuttal letters of revised versions are published 
online as a supplementary "peer review file". Authors may opt out of 
this scheme at the completion of the peer review process, before the 
paper is accepted. If the manuscript was transferred to us from another 
Nature journal, we will not publish reviewer reports or author rebuttals 
of versions of the manuscript under consideration at the originating 
Nature journal. For more information, please refer to our FAQ page.  
Reviewer information 
In recognition of the time and expertise our reviewers provide to Nature 
Communications’ editorial process, as of November, 2018, we formally 
acknowledge their contribution to the external peer review of articles 
published in the journal. All peer-reviewed content will carry an 
anonymous statement of peer reviewer acknowledgement, and for those 
reviewers who give their consent, we will publish their names alongside 
the published article. We will continue to publish peer reviewer reports 
where authors opt in to our separate transparent peer review scheme. In 
cases where authors opt in to publication of peer reviewer comments 
and reviewers opt in to being named, we will not link a reviewer’s name 
to their report unless they choose to sign their comments to the author 
with their name. For more information, please refer to our FAQ page.  
Double-blind peer review  
To participate in double-blind peer review, please prepare your 
manuscript in a way that conceals the identities of all the authors (see 
checklist) and tick the appropriate box during online submission. Please 
note that editors do not ensure that the paper is properly anonymized; 
that is the responsibility of the authors. 
Transferring your manuscript 
If an editor is unable to offer publication of your manuscript, you have 
the opportunity to transfer all manuscript materials, the decision letter 
and any referee comments to a selection of Springer Nature journals 
without re-entering submission information. Use the link in your 
decision letter to explore suggested alternative journals. You may then 
initiate the transfer process to the journal of your choice or submit 
elsewhere. Please see this page for more information.   
Appeals 
Authors who feel that they have strong grounds for appealing a decision 
may contact the journal to request the opening of an appeal, after which 
they may upload a cogently argued rebuttal letter that addresses the 
referees’ and/or editor’s comments in a point-by-point manner. 
Decisions are reversed on appeal only if the editors are convinced that 
 
Revised May 3rd, 2019 
the original decision was made in error, or if critical new information or 
data has been added. 
Comments on published articles 
Important scientific comments and clarifications on content published in 
Nature Communications may be submitted as Correspondence.   
Questions and manuscript submission 
General editorial enquiries should be addressed to the Editor at 
naturecommunications@nature.com. Manuscripts should be submitted 
through our online submission system. Further submission details are 
available here. 
Open access  
As of January 2016, the journal only publishes open access content, and 
legacy subscription content published in Nature Communications prior 
to 2016 has been made freely accessible. All articles are published 
under a CC BY license (Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 
International License). We offer APC waivers for papers whose 
corresponding authors are based in the world’s lowest income countries 
as defined by the World Bank. Discretionary APC waivers for authors 
will be considered on a case-by-case basis, and may be granted in cases 
of financial need. All applications for discretionary APC waivers should 
be made at the point of manuscript submission; requests made during 
the review process or after acceptance will not be considered. To 
request a waiver please contact apcwaivers@springernature.com. Full 
details of our APC waiver and discount policies can be found here. 
