Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadk6911 (2024)     5 April 2024
Science Adv AnceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
1 of 25
NEUROSCIENCE
Human brain glycoform coregulation network and 
glycan modification alterations in Alzheimer’s disease
Qi Zhang1, Cheng Ma2, Lih- Shen Chin1, Sheng Pan2, Lian Li1*
Despite the importance of protein glycosylation to brain health, current knowledge of glycosylated proteoforms 
or glycoforms in human brain and their alterations in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is limited. Here, we report a 
proteome- wide glycoform profiling study of human AD and control brains using intact glycopeptide- based quan-
titative glycoproteomics coupled with systems biology. Our study identified more than 10,000 human brain N- 
glycoforms from nearly 1200 glycoproteins and uncovered disease signatures of altered glycoforms and glycan 
modifications, including reduced sialylation and N-  glycan branching and elongation as well as elevated manno -
sylation and N- glycan truncation in AD. Network analyses revealed a higher- order organization of brain glycopro-
teome into networks of coregulated glycoforms and glycans and discovered glycoform and glycan modules 
associated with AD clinical phenotype, amyloid- β accumulation, and tau pathology. Our findings provide valuable 
insights into disease pathogenesis and a rich resource of glycoform and glycan changes in AD and pave the way 
forward for developing glycosylation- based therapies and biomarkers for AD.
INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia, 
characterized pathologically by accumulation of amyloid- β (Aβ ) 
plaques and tau neurofibrillary tangles in the brain (1, 2). Genome- 
wide association studies (GW AS) have identified over 40 genetic risk 
loci for AD (3 , 4), and transcriptomic and proteomic analyses re-
vealed RNA and protein expression changes that are much broader 
than Aβ and tau accumulation in AD brain (3 , 5). However, DNA 
variations and RNA or protein level changes alone are insufficient to 
account for all aspects of AD pathobiology, as proteins are known to 
undergo posttranslational modifications that control their function 
(6, 7) and proteoforms generated from protein modifications add 
enormous diversity and complexity to the proteome (7 ). The most 
prevalent and complex form of protein modification is glycosylation, 
which produces vastly diverse arrays of glycosylated proteoforms or 
glycoforms (a glycoform is an isoform of a protein that differs only 
with respect to the number or type of attached glycan) to greatly ex-
pand the proteome and its functionalities (8, 9).
As a major type of glycosylation, N- linked glycosylation controls 
many biological processes through covalent attachment of glycans to 
asparagine residues of proteins (9, 10). Protein N- glycosylation in-
volves a multi- step process that begins by oligosaccharyltransferase 
(OST)–catalyzed “en bloc” addition of a 14- sugar precursor Glc3Man9 
GlcNAc2 to asparagine residues within the sequon N- X- S|T (X  ≠ P) 
of newly synthesized proteins in the lumen of endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER). The N- glycans are then processed and remodeled by coordi-
nated actions of glycosyltransferases and glycosidases in the ER 
and Golgi compartments, producing a wide variety of glycoforms 
with distinct glycan compositions and structures, such as oligoman-
nose, hybrid, and complex- type N- glycans (9, 11). The site- specific N- 
glycans on glycoproteins not only regulate protein folding, activity, 
trafficking, and subcellular localization but also serve as the sugar 
code to mediate bio- recognition and signal distinct cellular outcomes 
(8, 12).
N- glycan modifications of proteins are vital for the development, 
maintenance, and function of the nervous system (13, 14). The im-
portance of protein N- glycosylation to brain health is underscored 
by the findings that genetic mutations in glycosylation enzymes for 
N- glycan attachment or processing cause human congenital disor -
ders with prominent neurological abnormalities (15). N- glycans on 
glycoproteins are increasingly recognized as functional effectors 
of genetic and epigenetic disease risk (16). Accumulating evidence 
points to a link between aberrant protein N- glycosylation and AD 
pathogenesis (17–19). Glycomic analyses of N- glycans detached from 
glycoproteins have revealed changes in global levels of N- glycans 
in AD brains (20–22), but the information of glycoproteins and gly-
cosites bearing the N- glycans was lost. We recently performed an 
integrated proteomic and glycoproteomic study using 18O- tagging to 
label in vivo N- glycosylation sites and identified disease- associated 
N- glycoproteins and glycosites with altered N- glycosylation site oc-
cupancy in AD brains (23). While 1132 unique N- glycoproteins were 
analyzed, the study was limited by the use of a deglycosylation step in 
the workflow, resulting in the loss of information on glycans at each 
glycosite. A more recent intact glycopeptide- based glycoproteomic 
study reported qualitative analysis of site- specific N- glycan and gly-
coforms from 268 unique N- glycoproteins (defined by unique gene 
ID) in AD and control brains (24), but suffered from the low cover-
age of brain N- glycoproteome and the lack of quantitative informa-
tion regarding the levels of site- specific N- glycans and glycoforms in 
human brain and their alterations in AD. Because of the inherent 
complexity of N- glycan modifications and technical challenges in 
intact glycoproteomics and associated data analysis, our current 
knowledge of system- wide changes in human brain glycoforms and 
site- specific N- glycan modifications in AD is very limited.
Here, we established an integrated approach that combines intact 
glycopeptide- based quantitative glycoproteomics and systems biolo-
gy for large- scale, in- depth analysis of glycoforms and site- specific N- 
glycan modifications in human brain and their changes in AD. Using 
this approach, we identified more than 10,000 N- glycoforms from 
1184 unique N- glycoproteins and obtained a system- level view of 
1department of Pharmacology and chemical Biology, c enter for neurodegenera-
tive disease, emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. 2t he 
Brown Foundation institute of Molecular Medicine, University of texas health Sci-
ence c enter at houston, houston, t X 77030, USA.
*c orresponding author. email: lli5@ emory. edu
c opyright © 2024 t he 
Authors, some rights 
reserved; exclusive 
licensee American 
Association for the 
Advancement of 
Science. no claim to 
original U.S. 
Government Works. 
distributed under a 
c reative commons 
Attribution 
nonc ommercial 
license 4.0 ( cc BY- nc ). 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 07, 2026


===== PAGE BREAK =====

Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadk6911 (2024)     5 April 2024
Science Adv AnceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
2 of 25
human brain glycoforms and their attached N- glycans. Our analyses 
reveal previously unknown changes in glycoforms and site- specific 
glycans in AD and uncover glycoform and glycan coregulation net-
works in human brain and their alterations in AD. Our findings pro-
vide mechanistic insights into the roles of N- glycan modifications in 
brain dysfunction in AD and establish a framework of glycosylation- 
based networks and pathways for understanding and treating AD.
RESUL TS
Glycoproteomic landscape of AD and control brains revealed 
by intact glycoproteomics
To characterize human brain glycoproteome and its changes in AD, 
we established and optimized a mass spectrometry–based intact 
glycoproteomics platform for large- scale simultaneous profiling of 
glycoproteins, glycoforms, glycosites, and site- specific glycan compo-
sitions in brain samples. Our glycoproteomics workflow consisted of 
SDS- mediated protein extraction (25), filter- aided sample prepara-
tion (FASP) (26), glycopeptide enrichment by strong anion exchange 
and electrostatic repulsion–hydrophilic interaction chromatography 
(SAX- ERLIC) (27), liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrom-
etry (LC- MS/MS) with higher- energy collisional dissociation (HCD) 
using a stepped collision energy (SCE) setting (28), and MS data 
analysis using Byonic software (29) for the identification of intact 
N- glycopeptides and their attached glycan compositions. Because 
correct assignment of glycopeptides carrying glycan compositions 
with similar masses [e.g., one sialic acid (NeuAc) versus two fucoses, 
Δm  =  1.0204 Da] is a challenge in glycoproteomics, we used the 
Byonic 182 human N- glycan library, which does not contain glycan 
compositions with more than one fucose, to minimize the false as-
signment of NeuAc- containing glycan compositions to fucosylated 
glycan compositions containing two or more fucoses. Byonic weights 
diagnostic peaks at mass/charge ratio (m/z) 292.103 for NeuAc and 
274.092 for NeuAc with water loss very heavily for the assignment of 
NeuAc- containing glycopeptides (29, 30). The glycopeptide assign-
ment was verified by manual validation with the evidence of diagnos-
tic oxonium ions and the monoisotopic precursor ion profile (fig. S1). 
Furthermore, analysis of technical replicates from control brain sam-
ples confirmed that the coverage and reproducibility of our glycopro-
teomics analyses are acceptable for glycoproteome- profiling studies 
(fig. S2). We used the optimized glycoproteomics workflow to analyze 
human dorsolateral prefrontal cortex tissue samples from the same 
cohort of 16 neuropathologically confirmed AD and control cases 
(table S1) as in our proteomics and glycosite- profiling studies (23, 31). 
In total, we identified 12,176 unique N- glycopeptides with attached 
N- glycans at the N- X- S|T (X  ≠ P) sequon, corresponding to 10,731 
unique N- glycoforms with 164 distinct N- glycan compositions at 
2544 unique N- glycosites in 1184 unique N- glycoproteins (Fig. 1, A to 
D, and table S2). This dataset represents the largest glycoproteome da-
taset of human AD and control brains to date with site- specific N- 
glycan and glycoform information.
Comparison of the glycoproteome dataset with our proteome 
profiling data from the same cohort (31) showed that 348 glycopro-
teins (~29%) of the 1184 glycoproteins were exclusively identified by 
intact glycoproteomics (Fig. 1E), demonstrating that our glycopro-
teomics workflow enables analysis of a subset of proteins that may 
otherwise remain undetected by global proteome profiling. As ex-
pected, the glycoproteome dataset was enriched for plasma mem-
brane and extracellular proteins, lysosomal and ER lumenal proteins, 
neuronal and synaptic membrane proteins as well as receptors, ion 
channels, and cell adhesion molecules (fig.  S3 and table  S3). Our 
analyses (Fig. 1, E and F) showed that ~51% of the N- glycoproteins 
and 41% of the N- glycosites identified in this study overlapped with 
those detected in our previous study (23) using a deglycosylation- 
based glycoproteomic approach (deglycoproteomics). The differ -
ences in the identifications of glycoproteins and glycosites between 
this work and our prior study are likely due to the differences in 
glycopeptide enrichment and MS fragmentation methods used 
in intact glycoproteomics versus deglycoproteomics analyses. 
Matching our intact glycoproteomic dataset to the UniProt database 
showed that 65% of the identified 2544 N- glycosites were annotated 
or predicted in the database (Fig. 1G). The current study provided 
experimental evidence for more than 950 UniProt- predicted N- 
glycosites and identified more than 880 N- glycosites that have not 
been previously reported in UniProt (Fig. 1G). Comparison of our 
glycoproteomic data with the results of Suttapitugsakul et  al. (24) 
and Tena et al. (32) showed substantial overlaps in the identified N- 
glycoproteins, N- glycosites, N- glycans, and N- glycoforms (fig. S4). 
Notably, our glycoproteomics workflow achieved a greater coverage 
of brain glycoproteome, enabling analysis of additional 9597 N-  
glycoforms, 892 N- glycoproteins, 2007 N- glycosites, and 45 N-  
glycan compositions in this work (fig. S4).
Our glycoproteomic analysis identified 7772 N- glycoforms in con-
trol and 8196 N- glycoforms in AD, with 5237 N- glycoforms overlap-
ping between control and AD brains (Fig.  1D and table  S2). We 
identified 164 N- glycan compositions in both control and AD brains 
(table S2) and categorized them into seven glycan types: oligoman-
nose, paucimannose, chitobiose core, undecorated complex/hybrid 
(neither fucosylated nor sialylated), fucosylated- only, sialylated- only, 
and sialofucosylated (sialylated and fucosylated) glycans. In control 
brains, ~36% of the total N- glycoforms carried oligomannose- type 
glycans and ~41% carried fucose- containing glycans (including both 
fucosylated- only glycans and sialofucosylated glycans) (Fig. 1H and 
fig. S5A), consistent with the findings from previous glycoproteomic 
and glycomic studies (20, 24, 33). In addition, ~26% of control brain 
glycoforms carried sialic acid–containing glycans (including both 
sialylated- only glycans and sialofucosylated glycans), ~8% carried un-
decorated complex/hybrid (neither fucosylated nor sialylated) gly-
cans, ~4% carried paucimannose- type glycans, and ~ 2% carried 
chitobiose core–type glycans (Fig. 1H and fig. S5A). We found that 
the percentages of sialylated- only glycoforms, sialofucosylated glyco-
forms, and total sialylated glycoforms were significantly decreased in 
AD brains, whereas the percentages of fucosylated- only glycoforms 
and undecorated complex/hybrid glycoforms were significantly in-
creased in AD (Fig. 1H). To gain insight into N- glycan branching, we 
classified the N- glycans into different branching categories based on 
the number of antennary HexNAc residues (i.e., total number of 
HexNAc residues − 2) in glycan compositions (Fig. 1H). We note that 
these branching categories are putative structural assignments be-
cause a single glycan composition may represent multiple glycan 
structures and branching types (34). Our analysis revealed that the 
percentages of glycoforms carrying glycans with a total of six HexNAc 
residues (assigned tetra- antennary glycans) or >6 HexNAc residues 
(highly branched or elongated glycans) were significantly decreased 
in AD brains (Fig. 1H).
We identified 1952 N- glycosites in control and 2114 N- glycosites 
in AD brains, with 1522 N- glycosites shared by control and AD 
brains (Fig.  1C, and table  S2). Approximately 57% of the total 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 07, 2026


===== PAGE BREAK =====

Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadk6911 (2024)     5 April 2024
Science Adv AnceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
3 of 25
Fig. 1. Intact glycopeptide- based glycoproteomics analysis of human AD and control brains. (A) t he total number of unique n-  glycopeptides, n-  glycoforms, n- 
glycoproteins, n- glycosites, and n- glycan compositions identified in this study. (B to D) comparisons of identified n- glycoproteins (B), n- glycosites (c ), and n- glycoforms 
(d) in Ad versus control ( ct ) brains. (E) c omparison of identified n-  glycoproteins by intact glycoproteomics with proteins detected by proteomics and deglycopro -
teomics. (F) Overlap of identified n-  glycosites with those detected by deglycoproteomics. (G) Match of the identified n-  glycosites to UniProt database of annotated n- 
glycosites. (H and I) distribution of identified n-  glycoforms (h) and n-  glycosites (i) containing the indicated glycan type in Ad and control brains. data represent means 
± Sd (n  = 8 cases per group). *P  < 0.05; **P  < 0.01; ***P  < 0.001; ****P  < 0.0001, unpaired two- tailed Student’s t test. (J) Pie charts showing the proportions of glycopro-
teins with the indicated number of in vivo n-  glycosites per protein (macroheterogeneity) and glycosites with the indicated number of n- glycans per site (microheteroge-
neity) in Ad and control brains.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 07, 2026


===== PAGE BREAK =====

Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadk6911 (2024)     5 April 2024
Science Adv AnceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
4 of 25
N- glycosites in control brains were observed with oligomannose gly-
cans, ~60% with fucose- containing glycans, 43% with sialic acid–
containing glycans, ~13% with undecorated complex/hybrid glycans, 
~9% with paucimannose glycans, and ~5% with chitobiose core–type 
glycans (Fig. 1I and fig. S5B). We note that in Fig. 1I, each N- glycosite 
was not categorized exclusively to a single glycan type, so one N-  
glycosite can count toward multiple glycan types if several different 
glycans were attached to that glycosite. We found that the percent-
ages of sialofucosylated glycosites and total sialylated glycosites 
were significantly decreased in AD, whereas the percentage of 
fucosylated-  only glycosites was significantly increased in AD 
(Fig. 1I). Our finding of disease- associated decreases in total sialylated 
glycosites (Fig. 1I) and sialylated glycoforms (Fig. 1H) indicates a 
reduction in overall sialylation in AD. In addition, we found that the 
percentage of glycosites carrying glycans with a total of five HexNAc 
residues (tri- antennary or bisecting GlcNAc glycans) was significantly 
increased in AD (Fig. 1I), consistent with reported elevation in 
bisecting GlcNAc modification in AD (35). In contrast, the percent-
age of glycosites carrying glycans with >6 HexNAc residues was sig-
nificantly decreased in AD (Fig.  1I), indicating reduced N- glycan 
branching and/or elongation in AD.
For the 1522 shared N- glycosites (Fig. 1C), we analyzed the 
differences in the number of glycoforms at each glycosite be-
tween AD and controls for each of the major glycan types and 
performed unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis to char -
acterize site- specific N- glycosylation alterations in AD (fig. S6). 
The heatmap illustrated AD- associated changes in glycosylation 
patterns in ~ 69% of the shared N- glycosites, whereas the remain-
ing ~31% of the glycosites showed no change in their glycosyl-
ation profiles in AD (fig. S6). For each glycan type, we observed 
increased glycosylation at some glycosites and decreased glyco-
sylation at some other glycosites (fig. S6). Quantification of the net 
change in the number of glycoforms for each glycan type across 
the 1522 glycosites showed an overall decrease in sialylation in AD 
and an overall increase in modifications by oligomannose gly-
cans, fucosylated- only glycans, and undecorated complex/hybrid 
glycans in AD (fig. S6).
Our analysis showed that more than half of the N- glycoproteins 
in control (~58%) and AD (~ 56%) brains were N- glycosylated at a 
single glycosite, while about 10% were multiply glycosylated with five 
or more in vivo N- glycosylation sites (Fig. 1J). The average number 
of in vivo N- glycosites per glycoprotein was 2.1 in both control and 
AD brains, consistent with the result from our glycosite- profiling 
study (23). Our glycoproteomic analysis revealed extensive heteroge-
neity in the number of different N- glycans that modified each gly-
cosite (Fig. 1J). Approximately 45% of the total glycosites were found 
with one glycan, whereas about 18% had more than five glycans and 
about 1% of the glycosites had more than 30 glycans in both control 
and AD brains (Fig. 1J). The identified glycosite with the highest de-
gree of glycan heterogeneity was cell surface receptor CD47 N111 
glycosite, which carried 78 glycans in control and 73 glycans in AD 
brains (table S2). The identified glycoprotein with the highest degree 
of glycoform diversity was neural cell adhesion protein contactin–1 
(CNTN1), which had 199 glycoforms with 83 glycans across eight 
glycosites in control brains and 194 glycoforms with 72 glycans 
across eight glycosites in AD brains (table S2). On average, each gly-
cosite had 4.0 glycans in control and 3.9 glycans in AD brains, and 
each glycoprotein had 8.5 glycoforms in control and 8.3 glycoforms 
in AD brains.
Site- specific glycosylation profiles of AD- related proteins 
and risk factors
Our glycoproteomic analysis mapped site- specific N- glycans and 
N- glycoforms of a number of GW AS- identified AD risk factors (e.g., 
ABCA7, ACE, ADAM10, CLU, CNTNAP2, EPHA1, PLD3, SORL1, 
and TM2D3) and other AD- related proteins (e.g., tau, nicastrin, and 
LRP1) in human AD and control brains (Fig. 2, fig. S7, and table S2). 
While our previous deglycoproteomics study (23) has shown that 
APP is an N- glycosylated protein, APP was not detected here, which 
could be due to the low abundance of APP glycoforms or the different 
methods of glycopeptide enrichment and MS fragmentation used in 
intact glycoproteomics versus deglycoproteomics analyses. The glyco-
sylation profiles of the detected AD- relevant proteins demonstrated a 
broad range of glycan and glycoform diversity, with some proteins 
(e.g., ABCA7 and EPHA1) having only one glycoform carrying a sin-
gle glycan at a single glycosite, and other proteins (e.g., CLU and 
LRP1) having more than 80 glycoforms carrying 30 or more glycans 
across multiple glycosites (Fig.  2 and fig.  S7). CLU (clusterin, also 
known as apolipoprotein J) is the third most significant risk factor for 
AD with an extracellular chaperone function (36). We identified a to-
tal of 88 CLU glycoforms carrying 60 different glycans across four 
glycosites in control brains and 104 CLU glycoforms carrying 67 gly-
cans across four glycosites in AD brains, with most glycoforms carry-
ing fucosylated and/or sialylated glycans (Fig.  2 and table  S2). Our 
analysis uncovered 26 AD- specific CLU glycoforms and 10 control- 
specific CLU glycoforms (Fig. 2 and table S2), revealing an involve-
ment of CLU N- glycosylation aberrations in AD.
SORL1 (sortilin- related receptor 1, also known as SORLA) is a 
cargo sorting receptor that has emerged as a major risk factor for 
both early- onset and late- onset AD (1, 37). Our analysis revealed 37 
SORL1 glycoforms carrying 15 glycans across 12 glycosites in control 
brains and 38 SORL1 glycoforms carrying 19 glycans across 15 gly-
cosites in AD brains, including 13 AD- specific glycoforms and 12 
control- specific glycoforms, with most glycoforms carrying oligo-
mannose glycans (Fig. 2 and table S2). We identified five SORL1 gly-
cosites (N616, N1068, N1246, N2069, and N2076) with a gain of 
N- glycosylation in AD and two SORL1 glycosites (N99 and N674) 
with a complete loss of N- glycosylation in AD (Fig. 2 and table S2). 
These findings, together with recent identification of SORL1 N674S 
mutation for a familial form of AD (37, 38), point to a pathogenic 
role of SORL1 N- glycosylation alterations in AD.
LRP1 (low- density lipoprotein receptor- related protein 1), a key 
regulator of Aβ and tau trafficking and AD neuropathology (39, 40), 
is the most heavily N- glycosylated protein that we identified in hu-
man brain (table S2). In total, 94 LRP1 glycoforms carrying 30 glycans 
across 31 glycosites were found in control brains and 119 LRP1 glyco-
forms carrying 35 glycans across 32 glycosites were found in AD 
brains, with most glycoforms carrying oligomannose or fucosylated- 
only type glycans (fig. S7 and table S2). We identified 47 LRP1 glyco-
forms and four LRP1 glycosites exclusively in AD brains and 22 LRP1 
glycoforms and three LRP1 glycosites only in controls (fig. S7 and ta-
ble S2), highlighting an association of LRP1 N- glycosylation aberra-
tions with AD.
We and others previously reported aberrant tau N- glycosylation in 
AD (17–19, 23), but the site- specific N- glycans and N- glycoforms of 
tau in AD remain unknown. Our analysis revealed that tau was mod-
ified at the N410 residue of tau441 isoform (corresponding to N727 of 
tau758 isoform) by a high- mannose- type glycan exclusively in AD 
but not controls (Fig. 2 and table S2), consistent with our prior finding 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 07, 2026


===== PAGE BREAK =====

Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadk6911 (2024)     5 April 2024
Science Adv AnceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
5 of 25
Fig. 2. Site- specific glycan and glycoform mapping of AD- related proteins and risk factors. (A) Bar graphs showing the number of identified n-  glycosites, n- glycan 
compositions, and n- glycoforms mapped to each of the Ad- related proteins and risk factors in Ad and control (ct ) brains. (B) Site- specific glycosylation patterns of cl U, 
tau, tM2d3, and SORl1 in Ad compared to control brains. n-  glycosites are indicated by the amino acid positions of glycosylated asparagine residues, with cyan-  and pink- 
colored n- glycosites denoting the glycosites detected exclusively in control and Ad brains, respectively.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 07, 2026


===== PAGE BREAK =====

Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadk6911 (2024)     5 April 2024
Science Adv AnceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
6 of 25
of tau N410 as the N- glycosite in AD (23). We also detected a tau 
glycoform carrying a sialylated- only glycan at the N359 glycosite in 
control brains (Fig. 2 and table S2), which could be due to glycosyl-
ation of a tau species with altered conformation in aging brains. In 
addition to CLU, SORL1, LRP1, and tau, our analysis revealed disease- 
associated changes in site- specific N- glycosylation patterns of several 
other AD- relevant proteins, including ACE, ADAM10, CNTNAP2, 
PLD3, TM2D3, and nicastrin (Fig. 2, fig. S7, and table S2). Together, 
these results provide strong support for the involvement of altered N- 
glycan modifications of the AD- related proteins and risk factors in 
AD pathophysiology.
Reduced sialylation and N- glycan branching or elongation 
and elevated mannosylation and N- glycan truncation in AD
To further characterize protein N- glycan modifications and their al-
terations in AD, we performed quantitative analyses of the intensities 
of glycopeptides with different glycan types to determine the relative 
abundance of glycan modification for each glycan category in indi-
vidual brain samples from AD and control cases (Fig. 3, A to C, and 
table S4). We found that protein modification by oligomannose gly-
cans is highly abundant in human brain, occurring at ~49% relative 
abundance (Fig. 3A and table S4A). Five of the top seven most abun-
dant N- glycans on brain proteins had compositions H5N2 to H9N2 
corresponding to oligomannose glycan structures containing two core 
GlcNAc and five to nine mannose residues (Man5 to Man9 glycans), 
with H5N2 being the most abundant N- glycan at ~21% relative abun-
dance in healthy human brains (Fig. 3C and table S4B). The other two 
of the top seven most abundant glycans had compositions H3N5F1 
and H3N4F1 corresponding to bisecting GlcNAc- containing, core- 
fucosylated glycan structures (Fig. 3C and table S4B), consistent with 
the prior findings from glycomic analyses of N- glycans released from 
brain glycoproteins (20, 33, 41). Our results revealed that the abun-
dances of H5N2, H3N5F1, and H3N4F1 modifications were signifi-
cantly increased in AD, whereas the abundance of H9N2 modification 
was significantly decreased in AD (Fig. 3C and table S4B).
Our quantitative analysis showed that in control brains, fucosyl-
ation (including modification by fucosylated- only and sialofucosyl-
ated glycans) and sialylation (including modification by sialylated- only 
and sialofucosylated glycans) occur at ~39% and ~19% relative abun-
dance, respectively (Fig. 3A, fig. S5C, and table S4A). The sialylation 
in AD brains was reduced to ~13% relative abundance, whereas the 
fucosylation abundance was not significantly changed in AD (Fig. 3A 
and table S4A). We also observed a significant increase in the abun-
dance of modification by complex/hybrid (neither fucosylated nor 
sialylated) glycans in AD (Fig. 3A and table S4A). Furthermore, our 
quantitative analysis revealed significant decreases in the abundances 
of modifications by glycans with 6 HexNAc residues (tetra- antennary 
glycans) or >6 HexNAc residues (highly branched or elongated gly-
cans) in AD brains (Fig.  3B and table  S4A), indicating reduced N-  
glycan branching and/or elongation in AD. In contrast, the abundance 
of modification by glycans with 5 HexNAc residues (tri- antennary or 
bisecting GlcNAc glycans) was significantly increased in AD (Fig. 3B 
and table S4A), in agreement with prior finding of increased bisecting 
GlcNAc modification in AD (35).
We next performed differential abundance analysis of modifica-
tions by 164 individual glycan compositions and identified 46 glycan 
modifications that were significantly altered in AD compared to con-
trols, including 30 glycan modifications with decreased abundance 
and 16 glycan modifications with increased abundance in AD (Fig. 3D 
and table S4, B and C). Unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis 
based on glycan modification abundance profiles demonstrated that 
the identified 46 glycan modifications provide an N- glycan disease 
signature for distinguishing AD cases from the controls (Fig.  3E). 
The glycan clustering dendrogram showed a segregation of glycan 
modifications into down- regulated and up- regulated clusters in AD 
(Fig. 3E). We found that ~83% of the identified down- regulated gly-
can modifications in AD were sialylation with a predominance of 
highly branched and/or elongated sialylated glycans (e.g., H8N6S1, 
H7N6F1S4, and H8N7F1S3), whereas none of the up- regulated gly-
can modifications was sialylation (Fig. 3E and table S4C), providing 
additional evidence supporting an association of decreased sialylation 
and N- glycan branching/elongation with AD. The identified up-  
regulated glycan modifications in AD (Fig. 3E and table S4C) include 
mannosylation by H4N2 and H5N2 glycans, modification by undeco-
rated complex/hybrid glycans with relatively simple, neutral struc-
tures (e.g., H3N3, H5N3, H4N4, and H5N4), and modification by 
bisecting GlcNAc- containing core- fucosylated glycans (e.g., H3N4F1, 
H3N5F1, and H3N6F1). We also observed increased modifications 
by chitobiose core–type glycans N1 and N2 and by paucimannose gly-
cans H1N2, H2N2, and H3N2 (Fig. 3E and table S4C), indicating el-
evated N- glycan truncation in AD.
AD- associated protein glycoforms with altered site- specific 
N- glycan modifications
Next, we assessed disease- associated abundance changes of individual 
glycoforms by performing differential glycoform abundance analysis 
(Fig. 4A and table S5A) and identified 556 glycoforms with signifi-
cantly altered levels (>1.3- fold change, P  < 0.05) in AD compared to 
control brains, including 421 glycoforms from 149 glycoproteins with 
increased glycoform abundance and 135 glycoforms from 58 glyco-
proteins with decreased glycoform abundance in AD (Fig. 4, A and B, 
and table  S5B). Comparison of glycoform abundance changes with 
the corresponding protein abundance changes measured in brain 
samples from the same cohort (31) showed that most of the observed 
changes in glycoform abundance in AD were caused by changes in 
site- specific N- glycan modification levels but not by altered protein 
expression levels (Fig. 4C, fig. S8, and table S5B). We found that 449 
glycoforms had >1.3- fold changes in site- specific N- glycan modifica-
tion levels in AD versus controls, including 337 glycoforms from 111 
glycoproteins with increased N- glycan modification levels and 112 
glycoforms from 52 glycoproteins with decreased N- glycan modifica-
tion levels in AD (Fig. 4C and table S5B). Unsupervised hierarchical 
clustering analysis showed that the identified 449 glycoforms segre-
gated into down- regulated and up- regulated clusters and they provide 
a glycoform signature for distinguishing AD cases from the controls 
(Fig. 4D). We observed an enrichment of sialylated- only and sialofu-
cosylated glycans in the down- regulated cluster and an enrichment of 
fucosylated- only, paucimannose- type, and oligomannose- type gly-
cans in the up- regulated cluster (Fig. 4D and table S5B). The identified 
N- glycans attached to disease- associated glycoforms (Fig. 4D and ta-
ble S5B) provide a site- specific glycan signature for AD.
Beside the glycoforms with altered glycan modification levels, 
our analyses also identified 179 glycoforms from 105 glycoproteins 
with a gain of a site- specific N- glycan modification in AD and 49 
glycoforms from 32 glycoproteins with a loss of a site- specific N-  
glycan modification in AD (Fig. 5, A to C, and table S5C), provid-
ing additional site- specific glycoform and glycan signatures for 
AD. In total, we identified 516 hyperglycosylated glycoforms from 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 07, 2026


===== PAGE BREAK =====

Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadk6911 (2024)     5 April 2024
Science Adv AnceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
7 of 25
Fig. 3. Disease- associated changes in overall levels of N- glycan modifications in AD. (A to C) comparison of relative abundances of glycan modifications for the indi-
cated glycan types (A), glycan branching categories (B), and top seven most abundant glycan compositions ( c ) in Ad versus control brains. c orresponding glycan struc-
tures are shown for glycan compositions in (c ). data represent means ± Sd (n  = 8 cases per group). *P  < 0.05; **P  < 0.01; ****P  < 0.0001, unpaired two- tailed Student’s t 
test. (D) volcano plot of fold changes in Ad versus control (log2 Fc ) for 164 individual glycan compositions and corresponding–log10 P values showing identification of 46 
significantly (P  < 0.05) altered glycan modifications in Ad with top 23 glycan modifications labeled. (E) Unsupervised hierarchical clustering based on glycan modification 
abundance profiles showing clear segregation of clinical cases into Ad (top) and control (ct ; bottom) groups and glycan modifications into up- regulated (left) and down- 
regulated (right) clusters in Ad. Glycan composition key: h, hexose; n, N- acetylhexosamine; F, fucose; S, sialic acid.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 07, 2026


===== PAGE BREAK =====

Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadk6911 (2024)     5 April 2024
Science Adv AnceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
8 of 25
178 hyperglycosylated proteins with increased or a gain of site-  
specific N- glycan modification in AD and 161 hypoglycosylated 
glycoforms from 71 hypoglycosylated proteins with decreased or a 
loss of site- specific N- glycan modification in AD (Fig. 5, A to C, 
and table S6, A and B). We found that both hyperglycosylation and 
hypoglycosylation datasets contain glycoforms and glycoproteins 
with altered paucimannosylation, oligomannosylation, fucosyl -
ation, and/or sialylation (Fig. 5, A to C; fig. S9; and table S6).
We then performed gene ontology (GO) enrichment analyses of 
the hyperglycosylation and hypoglycosylation datasets to gain insights 
into the cellular functions and processes that were affected by dysregu-
lated N- glycan modifications in AD (Fig. 5, D to F , and table S7, A and 
B). We found that both hypoglycosylation and hyperglycosylation 
datasets were significantly enriched for plasma membrane and 
extracellular proteins involved in cell adhesion, cell surface receptor 
signaling, nervous system process, and extracellular matrix (ECM) 
function. However, only AD- associated hyperglycosylation, but not 
hypoglycosylation, was significantly linked to GO terms of neurotrans-
mitter receptor activity and semaphorin receptor activity (Fig. 5E and 
table S7, A and B), whereas hypoglycosylation in AD, but not hyper-
glycosylation, was enriched for GO categories of endopeptidase regu-
lator activity and regulation of potassium ion transport (Fig. 5, E and 
F). Our analyses revealed multiple cellular functions that were differ-
entially affected by different types of altered glycan modifications in 
AD (Fig. 5, D to F , and table S7, C to J). For example, hyperoligoman-
nosylation, hypofucosylation, and hyposialylation in AD, but not 
other types of glycan modification changes, were significantly associ-
ated with ER and lysosome, whereas hyperpaucimannosylation was 
Fig. 4. Identification of AD- associated protein glycoforms with altered site- specific N- glycan modifications. (A) volcano plot of individual glycoform abundance 
fold changes in Ad versus control (log2 Fc ) and corresponding −log10 P values showing identification of 556 significantly altered (>1.3- fold change, P < 0.05) glycoforms 
in Ad with top 12 glycoforms labeled. (B) examples of identified glycoforms with decreased or increased abundance in Ad . data are shown as means ± Sd (n  = 8 cases 
per group). **P  < 0.01; ****P  < 0.0001, limma moderated t test. (C) Scatterplot showing at least ±1.3- fold changes in site- specific glycan modifications for most of the 
identified Ad - associated glycoforms with top 10 glycoforms labeled. (D) Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of individual clinical cases based on the identified 449 gly-
coforms with altered site- specific glycan modifications. Glycoforms are displayed as rows with corresponding glycan types shown in the left heatmap.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 07, 2026


===== PAGE BREAK =====

Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadk6911 (2024)     5 April 2024
Science Adv AnceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
9 of 25
selectively associated with Golgi apparatus (Fig. 5D). Hyperoligoman-
nosylation and hyperfucosylation in AD were found to specifically as-
sociate with Aβ binding (Fig. 5E), and hyperoligomannosylation and 
hyposialylation in AD were preferentially linked to regulation of bio-
logical quality (Fig. 5F).
Glycan modification coregulation network analysis uncovers 
glycan modules linked to AD pathology
To gain systems- level insights into glycan modifications in human 
brain and their changes in AD, we performed glycan modification 
coregulation network analysis by using the weighted correlation net-
work analysis (WGCNA) algorithm (42) to construct a glycan net-
work with nodes representing glycan modifications connected with 
edges defined by the connectivity based on pairwise correlation pat-
terns of glycan modification abundance profiles of 164 glycan com-
positions (Fig.  6A). By applying the scale- free topology criterion 
(42), we generated a human brain glycan network consisting of eight 
modules of strongly coregulated glycan modifications (Fig. 6, A and 
B, and table S8). These glycan modules (GNMs), color- coded using 
the WGCNA convention (42, 43), were labeled according to module 
Fig. 5. Analysis and annotation of glycoforms and glycoproteins with altered site- specific N- glycan modifications in AD. (A to C) hyperglycosylation includes gly-
coforms (A) and glycoproteins (c ) with increased site- specific n- glycan modification and/or a gain of site- specific n- glycan modification in Ad, whereas hypoglycosylation 
includes glycoforms (B) and glycoproteins ( c ) with decreased site- specific n-  glycan modification and/or a complete loss of site- specific n-  glycan modification in 
Ad. numbers indicate the total number or the number of hyperglycosylated or hypoglycosylated glycoforms or glycoproteins carrying the following glycan types: P , 
paucimannose; O, oligomannose; F, fucose-  containing glycan; and S, sialic acid–containing glycan. (D to F) GO cellular component, molecular function, and biological 
process categories enriched in Ad hyperglycosylation or hypoglycosylation dataset are shown with Benjamini–hochberg FdR-  corrected P values. c ount indicates the 
number of glycoproteins per GO term.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 07, 2026


===== PAGE BREAK =====

Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadk6911 (2024)     5 April 2024
Science Adv AnceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
10 of 25
Fig. 6. Glycan modification coregulation network analysis and identification of AD- related glycan modules. (A) Glycan WGcnA cluster dendrogram with dynamic 
tree cut revealing eight modules (color- coded) of coregulated n- glycan modifications. (B) inter- modular connectivity of the identified eight glycan modules. correlations 
of each glycan module with Ad status, Aβ pathology ( ceRAd score), or neurofibrillary tangle pathology (Braak stage) are shown by Biweight midcorrelation coefficients 
(bicor r values) in the heatmap, with significant positive (red) or negative (green) correlations marked by asterisks. *P  < 0.05; ****P  < 0.0001. (C) Box plots of module ei-
genglycan (Megn) values in Ad and control cases for each Ad - related module, with differences in Me gn values between Ad and control shown by Kruskal-  Wallis test P 
values. (D) Glycan coregulation network plots of Ad- associated modules GnM2, GnM1, and GnM4, with node representing individual glycan composition, node color for 
glycan modification type, and node size in proportion to node connectivity. Glycan composition key: h, hexose; n, N- acetylhexosamine; F, fucose; S, sialic acid.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 07, 2026


===== PAGE BREAK =====

Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadk6911 (2024)     5 April 2024
Science Adv AnceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
11 of 25
size from GNM1 (the largest module with 52 glycans) to GNM8 (the 
smallest module with 5 glycans) (Fig. 6B and table S8). We computed 
an eigenglycan for each module as the module representative and 
performed module- trait association analyses to assess the correlation 
relationships between each module eigenglycan and AD- relevant 
phenotypic traits and other characteristics of brain samples (fig. S10). 
We identified one positively correlated glycan module (GNM2) and 
two negatively correlated glycan modules (GNM1 and GNM4) with 
significant association to AD status, Aβ pathology [Consortium to 
Establish a Registry for Alzheimer’s disease (CERAD) score], and/or 
neurofibrillary tangle pathology (Braak stage), but no association to 
age, sex, ApoE genotype, or postmortem interval (Fig.  6B and 
fig. S10). We found that the AD- positively correlated module GNM2 
had significantly increased module glycan modification levels in AD, 
whereas AD- negatively correlated modules GNM1 and GNM4 had 
significantly decreased module glycan modification levels in AD 
(Fig. 6C).
Our analyses showed that the GNM2 module, which has a strong 
positive correlation to AD neuropathology (CERAD r  = 0.91, P  = 1 × 
10−6; Braak r  = 0.85, P  = 4 × 10−5), contained 25 glycan modifications 
(Fig. 6D), including modifications by oligomannose glycans (H4N2, 
H5N2, H6N2, and H7N2), undecorated complex/hybrid glycans with 
relatively simple, neutral structures (e.g., H3N3, H3N4, and H5N4), 
bisecting GlcNAc- containing core- fucosylated glycans (e.g., H3N4F1, 
H3N5F1, and H3N6F1), paucimannose glycans (H1N2, H2N2, and 
H3N2), and chitobiose core glycans (N1 and N2). In contrast, the 
GNM1 module with a strong negative correlation to AD neuropathol-
ogy (CERAD r  =  −0.87, P  = 1 × 10−5; Braak r  =  −0.9, P  = 2 × 10−6) 
contained 52 glycan modifications (Fig.  6D), which primarily con-
sisted of modifications by sialofucosylated glycans (e.g., H5N6F1S2, 
H7N7F1S3, and H8N7F1S3), sialylated- only glycans (e.g., H6N5S3, 
H7N6S3, and H7N6S4), and highly branched and/or elongated gly-
cans (e.g., H4N9, H10N10F1, and H11N11S1). We found cosegrega-
tion of core- fucosylated glycans N1F1, N2F1, H1N2F1, H4N2F1, and 
H5N2F1 in the AD- negatively correlated GNM1 module, whereas 
their non- fucosylated counterparts (N1, N2, H1N2, H4N2, and 
H5N2) were cosegregated in the AD- positively correlated GNM2 
module (Fig. 6D), indicating an association of reduced core fucosyl-
ation of these glycans with AD. Our analyses also showed that the 
GNM4 module with negative correlation to Aβ pathology but no cor-
relation to tau tangle pathology (Fig.  6D) contained seven glycan 
modifications, including modifications by sialofucosylated glycans 
H6N3F1S1 and H9N6F1S2, sialylated- only glycans H5N3S1 and 
H8N6S1, and the highly branched or elongated glycan H9N9F1, sug-
gesting an Aβ- specific negative effect on these glycan modifications. 
The predominant presence of sialylated glycans (including sialylated- 
only and sialofucosylated glycans) and highly branched or elongated 
N- glycans in AD- negatively correlated GNM1 and GNM4 modules 
further supports the involvement of decreased sialylation and N-  
glycan branching or elongation in AD pathophysiology.
Protein glycoform coregulation network analysis reveals 
AD- associated glycoform modules
To elucidate the relationships among protein glycoforms with differ-
ent site- specific glycan modifications in AD, we performed glyco-
form coregulation network analysis using WGCNA to construct a 
glycoform network with nodes representing glycoforms connected 
with edges defined by the connectivity based on pairwise correlation 
patterns of glycoform abundance profiles (Fig.  7A). Our network 
analysis revealed an organization of human brain glycoproteome 
into a network of 21 modules of coregulated glycoforms (Fig. 7, A 
and B, and table S9). These glycoform modules (GFMs) were labeled 
from GFM1 (the largest module with 440 glycoforms from 159 gly-
coproteins) to GFM21 (the smallest module with 36 glycoforms from 
16 glycoproteins) (Fig. 7B and table S9). In the glycoform network, 
different glycoforms from a single protein were often found in differ-
ent modules, such as the differential distribution of GABA- B recep-
tor subunit GABBR1 glycoforms to GFM2 (GABBR1_N440_H5N2 
and GABBR1_N440_H3N5F1 glycoforms), GFM4 (GABBR1_
N482_H5N2 glycoform), GFM8 (GABBR1_N440_H4N4F1 glyco-
form), GFM14 (GABBR1_N502_H4N5S1 glycoform), and GFM21 
(GABBR1_N440_H5N4F1 glycoform) modules (table S9). The colo-
calization of some glycoforms in the same module (e.g., the presence 
of two GABBR1 glycoforms in the GFM2 module) suggests coordi-
nated regulation of these glycoforms and their site- specific glycan 
modifications, whereas the partition of glycoforms into separate 
modules (e.g., the distribution of GABBR1 glycoforms in the GFM2, 
GFM4, GFM8, GFM14, and GFM21 modules) may reflect differen-
tial regulation of site- specific glycan modifications or different cel-
lular or subcellular distributions of distinct glycoforms.
We performed module- trait association analyses using module 
eigenglycoforms as the module representatives and identified seven 
glycoform modules with significant correlations to AD status, Aβ 
CERAD score, and/or tau Braak stage, including five positively cor-
related modules (GFM1, GFM2, GFM4, GFM11, and GFM19) and 
two negatively correlated modules (GFM3 and GFM14) (Fig. 7B and 
fig. S11). None of the seven glycoform modules showed significant 
correlation to age, sex, or postmortem interval (fig. S11), indicating 
that the identified AD association of these modules was not due to 
the potential confounding factors. We found that GFM1 and GFM11 
modules also showed positive correlations with the ApoE4 allele dos-
age (Fig. 7B and fig. S11), in line with the dosage- dependent role of 
ApoE4 allele for increasing AD risk (44). In addition, we identified 
an ApoE4- positively correlated module (GFM6) with no association 
to AD phenotypes (fig. S11), indicating that some ApoE4- induced 
changes in site- specific glycan modifications are unrelated to AD pa-
thology. Our analysis showed that the module glycoform abundance 
profiles for all five AD- positively correlated modules were signifi-
cantly increased in AD (Fig.  7C), whereas those for the two AD-  
negatively correlated modules were significantly decreased in AD 
(Fig. 7D).
We then assessed the enrichment of cell- type markers for different 
brain cells in glycoform modules and found that six of the seven 
AD- associated glycoform modules (GFM1, GFM2, GFM3, GFM4, 
GFM11, and GFM19) were highly enriched with neuronal cell mark-
ers, although some of these modules were also enriched with astro-
cyte and/or oligodendrocyte markers (Fig.  7B). By contrast, the 
AD- associated GFM14 module was preferentially enriched with oli-
godendrocyte markers (Fig. 7B). Analysis of inter- modular relation-
ships using pairwise correlations between module eigenglycoforms 
revealed a higher- order organization of closely interconnected glyco-
form modules into superclusters (Fig. 7B). The colocalization of AD- 
negatively correlated GFM3 and GFM14 modules in a supercluster 
(Fig. 7B) suggests close relationships among the glyco- pathways and/
or biological processes associated with these two negatively correlated 
glycoform modules. We found that four of the five AD- positively 
correlated modules (GFM1, GFM4, GFM11, and GFM19) were 
colocalized in another supercluster (Fig. 7B), indicating that the 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 07, 2026


===== PAGE BREAK =====

Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadk6911 (2024)     5 April 2024
Science Adv AnceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
12 of 25
Fig. 7. Protein glycoform coregulation network analysis and identification of AD- associated glycoform modules. (A) Glycoform WGcnA analysis identifies 21 mod-
ules of coregulated protein glycoforms. (B) inter- modular connectivity of 21 glycoform coregulation modules. heatmap at the top shows the correlations (bicor r values) 
of each glycoform module with the indicated Ad - relevant traits, with significant positive (orange) or negative (green) correlations marked by asterisks. heatmap at the 
bottom shows the enrichment for markers of astrocyte, microglia, oligodendrocyte, or neuron in each module with FdR- adjusted P values. *P  <  0.05; **P  <  0.01; 
***P  < 0.001; ****P  < 0.0001. (C and D) Box plots of module eigenglycoform (Me gf ) values in Ad and control cases for Ad - positively correlated modules ( c ) and Ad - 
negatively correlated modules (d), with differences in Megf values between Ad and control shown by Kruskal- Wallis test P values.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 07, 2026


===== PAGE BREAK =====

Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadk6911 (2024)     5 April 2024
Science Adv AnceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
13 of 25
corresponding glyco- pathways and/or biological processes for these 
positively correlated modules may also be functionally related and/or 
coordinately regulated in AD.
Topological structures and membership information of the seven 
AD- associated glycoform modules are provided in Fig. 8A and ta-
ble S9. Given the central role of hub nodes in determining a network 
module’s architecture and function (45, 46), we identified hub glyco-
forms for each module using the intramodular connectivity and de-
picted the top 10 most- connected hub glycoforms in the center of 
each network plot (Fig. 8A). We assessed the glycan characteristics of 
each AD- related module by analyzing the distributions of site-  
specific glycan types and glycan compositions attached to glycoforms 
in each module (Fig.  8, B and C) and found that each AD- related 
module had a distinctive site- specific glycan modification pattern, 
which reflects module- specific coregulation among glycoforms and 
their site- specific glycan modifications in the module. For example, 
the GFM1 module was enriched for glycoforms carrying chitobiose 
core, paucimannose, oligomannose, or fucosylated- only glycans and 
underrepresented for glycoforms with sialylated- only or sialofu-
cosylated glycans, whereas the GFM3 module was enriched for sialo-
fucosylated and sialylated- only glycoforms but underrepresented for 
glycoforms bearing other glycan types (Fig.  8B). Our analyses re-
vealed that enrichment of oligomannosylated glycoforms and deple-
tion of sialofucosylated glycoforms is a common feature shared by all 
five AD- positively correlated modules, and the opposite was true for 
AD- negatively correlated modules, which were enriched for sialofu-
cosylated glycoforms and depleted for oligomannosylated glyco-
forms (Fig. 8B).
Glycoform module analyses uncover multiple CNS processes 
altered by dysregulated glycan modifications in AD
We performed GO enrichment analyses and found that the identified 
AD- related glycoform modules had overlapping yet distinct biochemi-
cal and functional characteristics (Fig.  8, D to F , and table  S10). All 
seven disease- related modules were prominently associated with cell 
adhesion process with an overrepresentation of glycoforms from cell 
adhesion proteins, including neural cell adhesion molecules (e.g., 
NCAM1, NCAM2, NRCAM, L1CAM, and CHL1/L1CAM2), synap-
tic cell adhesion molecules (CADM1/SynCAM and CADM2/Syn-
CAM2), IgLON family of cell adhesion molecules (OPCML, LSAMP , 
and NEGR1), adhesion G protein–coupled receptors (ADGRB1/BAI1, 
ADGRB3/BAI3, and ADGRL1/latrophilin- 1), neurexin- 1 (NRXN1), 
teneurin- 4 (TENM4), neuronal pentraxin- 1 (NPTX1), neuronal pen-
traxin receptor (NPTXR), contactins (CNTN1, CNTN2, CNTN3, and 
CNTN4), contactin- associated proteins (CNTNAP1/Caspr1, CNT-
NAP2/Caspr2, CNTNAP4/Caspr4, and CNTNAP5/Caspr5), cadher-
ins (CDH2, CDH10, and CDH13), protocadherins (PCDH1, PCDH9, 
and PCDH17), neurofascin (NFASC), neogenin (NEO1), neuroplastin 
(NPTN), ADAM22, LGI1, CD47, CD200, SIRPA, JAM3, and/or THY1 
(Fig.  8, E and F , and table  S9). The identification of site- specific 
glycoforms from cell adhesion proteins as top hub glycoforms of 
AD- positively correlated modules (e.g., L1CAM_N671_H3N4F1, 
NRCAM_223_H4N2, CNTN1_N338_H5N2, and OPCML_N70_
H6N2) and AD- negatively correlated modules (CD200_N90_
H6N6F1S2 and THY1_N42_H5N4F1 glycoforms) (Fig.  8A and 
table  S9) supports a central role of cell adhesion glycoforms as key 
drivers of disease- associated glycoform network changes in AD. Our 
results (Figs. 7 and 8), together with increasing evidence for many of 
these cell adhesion proteins in controlling synapse organization and 
remodeling, synaptic function, trans- synaptic signaling, and/or 
neuron- glia communication (47, 48), indicate that dysregulated glycan 
modifications (e.g., up- regulated oligomannosylation and down-  
regulated sialylation) of cell adhesion proteins could be a previously 
unidentified pathogenic mechanism leading to synapse loss, synaptic 
dysfunction, and cognitive decline in AD.
Another prominent feature shared by all seven AD- related mod-
ules was their association with ECM organization and matrisome 
function with an enrichment of glycoforms from matrisome pro-
teins, including ECM structural constituents [e.g., laminins (LAMA2, 
LAMA5, and LAMC1), collagens (COL6A2 and COL6A3), heparan 
sulfate proteoglycan HSPG2/perlecan, fibromodulin (FMOD), nido-
gen- 2 (NID2), biglycan (BGN), TINAGL1, and vitronectin (VTN)], 
perineuronal net components [e.g., tenascins (TNC and TNR), neu-
rocan (NCAN), aggrecan (ACAN), brevican (BCAN), hyaluronan 
and proteoglycan link protein 1 (HAPLN1), and versican (VCAN)], 
ECM receptors [e.g., integrins (ITGA1, ITGA2, ITGA6, ITGA7, 
ITGAM, ITGAV , ITGB1, and ITGB8), agrin (AGRN), BCAM, and 
tetraspanins (TSPAN3 and TSPAN8)], ECM- associated proteins 
[e.g., SPARCL1/hevin, clusterin (CLU), semaphorins (SEMA4D and 
SEMA7A), GPNMB/osteoactivin, and hemopexin (HPX)], and 
ECM regulators [ADAM10, lysyl hydroxylase- 1 (PLOD1), A2M, 
alpha- 1- antitrypsin (SERPINA1), and neuroserpin (SERPINI1)] 
(Fig. 8, D to F , and table S9). The importance of ECM glycoforms 
in driving AD- associated glycoform network changes is highlighted 
by their identification as top hub glycoforms of AD- positively 
correlated modules (e.g., LAMA2_N2028_H3N4F1, LAMA2_
N1901_H5N2, NCAN_N122_H6N2, HAPLN1_N56_H3N5F1, and 
LAMA5_N2501_H5N4F1S1) and AD- negatively correlated mod-
ules (LAMC1_N1107_H5N4F1, LAMC1_N1223_H6N5F1S1, and 
TNR_N1261_H5N5F1S1) (Fig.  8A and table  S9). Our findings 
(Fig. 8 and table S10) reveal a previously unrecognized connection of 
aberrant mannosylation, fucosylation, and sialylation of matrisome 
proteins with altered ECM dynamics, matrisome dysfunction, and 
impaired ECM- cell communication in AD. A number of the identi-
fied matrisome proteins (e.g., HSPG2, TNC, BGN, VCAN, ITGAV , 
ITGB1, ITGAM, CLU, SEMA7A, A2M, and SERPINA1) play critical 
roles in the control of inflammatory response (49, 50). Furthermore, 
AD- associated modules also contained glycoforms from other 
inflammation- related proteins [e.g., complement C3, complement 
factor H (CFH), HP , tissue factor F3, CD47, and JAM3]. Together, 
these results highlight a link between altered glycan modifications of 
these glycoproteins and neuroinflammation in AD.
Our analyses showed that AD- positively correlated GFM1, GFM2, 
and GFM4 modules were highly enriched with mannosylated and fu-
cosylated glycoforms from neuronal and synaptic membrane proteins 
involved in neurotransmission and synaptic plasticity, including neu-
rotransmitter receptors [glutamate receptors (GRM3/mGluR3, GRM5/
mGluR5, GRIN1/NR1, GRIN2A/NR2A, GRIN2B/NR2B, GRIA1/GluR1, 
GRIA2/GluR2, GRIA3/GluR3, GRIK2/GluR6, and GRIK3/GluR7), 
GABA receptors (GABBR1, GABBR2, GABRA3, GABRB2, and 
GABRG2), and glycine receptor GPR158/mGlyR)], synaptic vesicle 
proteins SYNPR and SYPL1, voltage- gated Ca 2+ channel subunit 
CACNA2D1, neuronal K +/Cl− cotransporter SLC12A5/KCC2, K + 
channel modulatory subunit DPP6, glutamate receptor trafficking reg-
ulator OLFM1/noelin, and hippocampal excitatory synapse organizer 
IGSF8 with GRM3_N414_H3N4F1, GRIK2_N378_H8N2, GRIN1_
N276_H5N2, GABBR1_N482_H5N2, GRM5_N382_H3N5F1, and 
SYNPR_N33_ H3N5F1 as top hub glycoforms (Fig. 8, A, E, and F , and 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 07, 2026


===== PAGE BREAK =====

Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadk6911 (2024)     5 April 2024
Science Adv AnceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
14 of 25
Fig. 8. Biochemical and functional characteristics of AD- associated glycoform module networks. (A) Glycoform coregulation network plots of Ad- associated mod-
ules, with node representing individual glycoform, node color for site- specific glycan modification type, and node size in proportion to kMe- based intramodular connec-
tivity. A maximum of 50 glycoforms are shown for each module, with top 10 hub glycoforms in the center of each network plot. t he glycoform id and full name 
(protein_n- glycosite_glycan composition) for top 10 hub glycoforms are indicated next to the module network plot, with glycoforms color- coded for site- specific glycan 
types. t he full list of glycoforms in each module and their kMe values are provided in table S9. (B) heatmap shows the percentages of glycoforms with the indicated glycan 
types in each Ad - associated module (% Glycoform scale bar) and the net change in the percentage of glycoforms carrying each glycan type in each module versus the 
percentage of glycoforms carrying the same glycan type in the control brain (% change scale bar). (C) heatmap shows the percentages of glycoforms carrying each of top 
10 most frequent glycan compositions in each Ad- associated module. (D to F) GO cellular component, molecular function, and biological process categories enriched in 
each Ad - associated module are shown with Benjamini- hochberg FdR- corrected P values. count indicates the number of glycoproteins per GO term.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 07, 2026


===== PAGE BREAK =====

Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadk6911 (2024)     5 April 2024
Science Adv AnceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
15 of 25
table S9), indicating an association of up- regulated mannosylation and 
fucosylation of the neurotransmitter receptors and synaptic proteins 
with synaptic dysfunction and cognitive decline in AD. By contrast, 
AD- negatively correlated GFM3 module was associated with the neu-
rotransmission process with an enrichment of sialylated glycoforms 
from neuronal and synaptic proteins involved in ion transport, includ-
ing Na+/K+ transporting adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) subunits 
ATP1B1 and ATP1B2, voltage- gated Na+ channel subunit SCN2A/
Nav1.2, glutamate ionotropic receptor subunit GRIA2/GluR2, synaptic 
vesicle proteins SV2A and SYPL1, K+ channel modulatory subunits 
DPP6 and DPP10, and choline transporter- like protein SLC44A2 with 
ATP1B1_N193_H7N6S3, ATP1B1_N193_H7N6F1S3, and SYPL1_
N71_H6N4F1S1 as top hub glycoforms (Fig.  8, A, E, and F , and ta-
ble  S9), revealing an involvement of decreased sialylation of these 
proteins in altered brain cell ion homeostasis and neurotransmis-
sion in AD.
Another key finding from our analyses is a strong association of 
AD- positively correlated GFM1, GFM2, and GFM4 modules and the 
AD- negatively correlated GFM3 module with signal transduction pro-
cesses in the brain, as demonstrated by an enrichment of glycoforms 
from a variety of signaling receptors [e.g., insulin receptor (INSR), 
neurotrophic tyrosine kinase receptor NTRK2/TrkB, GDNF receptor 
GFRA2, EGF family receptors (EGFR and ERBB3), protein tyrosine 
phosphatase receptor PTPRZ1, purinergic receptor P2RX7, inositol 
1,4,5- trisphosphate receptor ITPR1/IP3R1, neuronal pentraxin 
NPTX1, neuronal pentraxin receptor NPTXR, interleukin- 6 receptor 
subunit IL6ST, V- set immunoregulatory receptor VSIR, adhesion G 
protein–coupled receptors (ADGRB1/BAI1, ADGRB3/BAI3, and 
ADGRL1/latrophilin- 1), integrins (ITGA1, ITGA2, ITGA6, ITGA7, 
ITGAM, ITGAV , ITGB1, and ITGB8), and plexin family of semaphorin 
receptors (PLXNA1, PLXNA2, PLXNA4, PLXNB1, PLXNB2, and 
PLXNC1)], signaling receptor ligands (e.g., semaphorins SEMA4D and 
SEMA7A), and other signaling regulators (e.g., ADAM10, ADAM22, 
Nicastrin, ACE1, DKK3, MEGF8, NEGR1, LINGO1, and CD38) 
(Fig. 8E and table S9). These results, together with the identification of 
site- specific glycoforms from a number of signaling receptors and regu-
lators as top hub glycoforms of AD- positively correlated modules (e.g., 
ADGRB3_N779_H5N2, NPTX1_N154_H3N5F1, ADAM22_N634_
H3N5F1, NTRK2_N95_H6N2, and PLXNB2_N127_ H3N5F1) and 
AD- negatively correlated modules (e.g., LINGO1_N505_H3N6F1S2 
and NEGR1_N294_H8N7F1), indicate that elevated mannosylation 
and fucosylation and reduced sialylation and N- glycan branching or 
elongation of the signaling receptors and regulators could be previously 
unknown pathogenic events leading to neuronal signaling dysregula-
tion in AD.
We found that six of the seven AD- related glycoform modules 
(GFM1, GFM4, GFM11, GFM19, GFM3, and GFM14) were closely 
linked to lysosomal function with an enrichment of glycoforms 
from lysosomal proteins, including lysosomal lumenal hydrolases 
[e.g., cathepsins (CTSD and CTSL), tripeptidyl- peptidase 1 (TPP1), 
palmitoyl- protein thioesterase 1 (PPT1), lysosomal alpha- glucosidase 
(GAA), lysosomal acid glucosylceramidase (GBA1), acid ceramidase 
1 (ASAH1), prenylcysteine oxidase 1 (PCYOX1), beta- glucuronidase 
(GUSB), iduronate 2- sulfatase (IDS), steroid sulfatase (STS), hexosa-
minidase subunit A (HEXA), sialic acid acetylesterase (SIAE), and 
lysosomal carboxypeptidase C (PRCP)], lysosomal membrane- bound 
hydrolases (e.g., phospholipase PLD3 and lysosomal acid phospha-
tase ACP2), lysosomal transporters (e.g., vacuolar H +- transporting 
ATPase subunits ATP6AP1 and ATP6V0E2, and ATP- binding 
cassette transporter ABCA2), and other lysosomal membrane gly-
coproteins (e.g., LAMP1, LAMP2, and TMEM25) (Fig.  8D and ta-
ble S9). Furthermore, site- specific glycoforms from several lysosomal 
glycoproteins (e.g., PLD3_N387_N1F1, PLD3_N387_H3N5F1, PCY-
OX1_N323_H5N2, TPP1_N313_H5N2, ABCA2_N14_H3N5F1, 
ABCA2_N1775_H9N2, and CTSL_N221_H6N2) were identified as 
top hub glycoforms of AD- related modules (Fig.  8A and table  S9). 
These results, together with ample evidence for the critical roles of the 
identified lysosomal hydrolases, transporters, and other lysosomal 
glycoproteins in controlling intracellular degradation and brain ho-
meostasis (51, 52) and the finding of PLD3 as a risk factor for AD 
(53), indicate that altered glycan modifications (e.g., increased pauci-
mannosylation or oligomannosylation) of the lysosomal hydrolases 
and lysosomal membrane glycoproteins could be a previously un-
identified pathogenic mechanism leading to lysosomal dysfunction, 
defective lysosomal acidification, impaired degradation, and neuro-
degeneration in AD.
Our analyses revealed that AD- positively correlated GFM1, GFM2, 
and GFM4 modules were also associated with the process of receptor- 
mediated endocytosis with an enrichment of mannosylated or fucosyl-
ated glycoforms from endocytic cargo receptors, including low- density 
lipoprotein (LDL) receptor family members LRP1 and LRP1B, sortilin 
SORT1, sortilin- related receptor SORL1, and lysosomal sorting 
receptor M6PR/CD- MPR with LRP1_N1575_H5N2, LRP1_N2620_
H5N2, LRP1_N1511_H4N4F1, M6PR_N57_H7N2, and SORL1_
N1894_H5N2 as top hub glycoforms (Fig. 8, E and F , and table S9). 
While fucosylated SORT1 glycoforms (SORT1_N98_H3N4F1, 
SORT1_N98_H4N5F1, and SORT1_N162_H3N5F1) were localized 
in AD- positively correlated GFM1 module, sialylated SORT1 glyco-
forms (SORT1_N98_H4N5F1S1 and SORT1_N98_H4N6S1) were 
found in the AD- negatively correlated GFM3 module linked to the 
process of receptor- mediated endocytosis (Fig.  8, E and F , and ta-
ble  S9). Furthermore, sialylated glycoforms from lysosomal sorting 
receptor SCARB2/LIMP2 (SCARB2_N224_H5N6F1S2 and SCARB2_
N224_H6N6F1S2) were also localized in the GFM3 module (table S9). 
Our findings, together with the reported functions of these cargo re-
ceptors in controlling endocytic trafficking of APP , tau, and/or other 
cargos (40, 54) and GW AS identification of SORL1 and SORT1 as risk 
factors for AD (55), indicate that elevated mannosylation and fucosyl-
ation and reduced sialylation of the endocytic cargo receptors could be 
previously unrecognized pathogenic events contributing to endocytic 
trafficking dysregulation and AD neuropathology.
Alterations in N- glycan modification enzymes and 
regulators in AD
Protein N- glycosylation is a highly regulated process that includes se-
quential steps of initiation, trimming or processing, branching and 
elongation, and capping, which are controlled by the ordered actions 
of a variety of glycosyltransferases, glycosidases, and other regulators 
in the ER and Golgi compartments (8, 9). To determine whether al-
terations in N- glycosylation enzymes and regulators are involved in 
driving the N- glycan modification changes observed in AD brain, we 
examined the mRNA expression profiles of the N- glycosylation–related 
genes in the transcriptome datasets from the Religious Orders Study 
and the Memory and Aging Project (ROSMAP), Mount Sinai School 
of Medicine (MSSM), and Mayo studies covering seven brain regions 
(Fig. 9), using a published resource of AD brain transcriptome meta- 
analysis (56). In addition, we assessed the protein expression patterns 
of N- glycosylation enzymes and regulators (Fig. 9) in our proteome 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 07, 2026


===== PAGE BREAK =====

Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadk6911 (2024)     5 April 2024
Science Adv AnceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
16 of 25
dataset from the same cohort (31) and five other AD brain proteome 
datasets (57–61). We found that the expression levels of several sub-
units (e.g., STT3A, STT3B, RPN2, TUSC3 and MAGT1) of OST en-
zyme complexes, which catalyze the initiation step of N- glycosylation 
by cotranslationally or posttranslationally transferring a preformed 
oligosaccharide Glc3Man9GlcNAc2 to asparagine residues of proteins 
in the ER (8, 62), were altered in AD brain (Fig. 9), consistent with our 
previous identification of OST dysregulation as a cause of protein N- 
glycosylation site occupancy changes in AD (23).
Our multiomics interrogations revealed that glucosidase I (MOGS) 
and GANAB and PRKCSH subunits of glucosidase II, the enzymes 
that sequentially trim the three terminal glucose residues from the Gl-
c3Man9GlcNAc2 glycan on glycoproteins (63), had altered protein lev-
els in AD brain (Fig. 9). Furthermore, we found that malectin (MLEC), 
an ER lectin that binds the di- glucosylated glycan generated by gluco-
sidase I to retain immature or misfolded proteins in the ER (63), cal-
nexin (CANX) and calreticulin (CALR), the ER lectin chaperones that 
bind the mono- glucosylated glycan generated by glucosidase II to fa-
cilitate protein folding (9), and UDP- glucose:glycoprotein glucosyl-
transferase UGGT1 and UGGT2, the protein folding sensors that 
re- glucosylate the incompletely folded proteins to allow re- association 
with the CANX- CALR chaperone system for further folding (9, 64), 
were also altered in AD brain (Fig. 9). In addition, LMAN2/VIP36, a 
lectin cargo receptor that binds Man 8GlcNAc2 glycan on correctly 
folded proteins to mediate ER- to- Golgi trafficking (63), and ERLEC1/
XTP3B, an ER lectin that binds oligomannose glycans (Man7GlcNAc2, 
Man6GlcNAc2, and Man5GlcNAc2) on misfolded proteins to promote 
ER- associated degradation (ERAD) (9, 63), were down- regulated in 
AD brain (Fig. 9). Moreover, single- nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
in CANX and EDEM2 (an ER degradation- enhancing α- mannosidase- 
like protein for mannose trimming of misfolded proteins) were 
associated with increased AD risk by GW AS meta- analyses (65, 66). 
Together, these data provide evidence supporting the involvement of 
altered ER glycan- processing enzymes and ER lectins in causing the 
protein N- glycan modification changes in AD brain uncovered by 
this study.
Our analyses showed that N - acetylglucosaminyltransferase 
MGAT1, a Golgi enzyme that catalyzes the first step in N- glycan 
branching by adding a GlcNAc residue to Man5GlcNAc2 on glycopro-
teins to form GlcNAcMan5GlcNAc2 glycan (8), and α- mannosidase II 
enzymes MAN2A1 and MAN2A2, which remove the terminal two 
mannose residues to generate GlcNAcMan3GlcNAc2 glycan (8), were 
up- regulated in AD brain (Fig. 9). The up- regulation of these enzymes 
provides a mechanism for driving the increased overall levels of 
protein modifications by H5N3 and H3N3 glycans observed in AD 
brain (Fig. 3D and table S4C). In addition, we found that MGAT4C, 
Fig. 9. Multiomics interrogations revealing alterations in N-  glycosylation machinery in AD. integrated analyses of Ad transcriptome, proteome, and GWAS meta- 
analysis datasets reveal disease- associated changes in n- glycan modification enzymes and regulators in human Ad cases. dataset 1 includes transcriptome data from the 
Religious Orders Study and the Memory and Aging Project (ROSMAP), Mount Sinai School of Medicine (MSSM), and Mayo studies. dataset 7 includes M29 Glycosylation/
eR module membership and correlation data to cognitive function (MMSe30 score), Aβ pathology (ceRAd score), or nFt pathology (Braak stage). t he transcriptome and 
proteome datasets were obtained from the following brain regions: dlPFc, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; FP , frontal pole; iFG, inferior frontal gyrus; PhG, parahippocam-
pal gyrus; St G, superior temporal gyrus; tcX, temporal cortex; cBe , cerebellum; Fc, frontal cortex; ec, entorhinal cortex; hiP , hippocampus; and c G, cingulate gyrus. t he 
reference number for each dataset is indicated in parentheses.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 07, 2026


===== PAGE BREAK =====

Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadk6911 (2024)     5 April 2024
Science Adv AnceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
17 of 25
an N- acetylglucosaminyltransferase that promotes the formation of 
tri-  and tetra- antennary branching glycan structures in the Golgi (8), 
were down- regulated in AD brain (Fig.  9). Furthermore, GW AS 
meta- analyses have identified SNPs in MGAT4B and MGAT5 as can-
didate risk alleles for AD (65, 66). These findings suggest that reduced 
MGAT4C expression and altered MGAT4B and MGAT5 enzymes 
may cause decreased N- glycan branching in AD as implicated by our 
results (Figs. 1, H and I, and 3B).
Examination of N- glycan elongation enzymes in the multiomics 
datasets showed that B3GALT2, a galactosyltransferase that attaches 
galactose to the terminal GlcNAc residue of glycans to form type 1 
LacNAc- based chain (8), was down- regulated in AD (Fig. 9), whereas 
B4GALT1 and B4GALT4, the galactosyltransferases that produce a 
type 2 LacNAc- based glycan chain (8 ), were up- regulated in AD 
(Fig. 9), indicating dysregulated galactosylation and elongation in AD 
brain. Analysis of N- glycan capping enzymes revealed that while fu-
cosyltransferases were mostly unaltered in AD, several sialyltransfer-
ases such as ST3GAL3 and ST6GAL2, which attach sialic acid to the 
galactose residue via α 2,3-  and α2,6- linkage, respectively (8 ), and 
ST8SIA2, ST8SIA3, and ST8SIA4, which add sialic acid to the termi-
nal sialic acid residue via α2,8- linkage to generate di- , oligo-  or poly- 
sialylated glycoproteins (8), were down- regulated in AD brain (Fig. 9). 
Furthermore, GW AS meta- analysis has associated an SNP in ST8SIA3 
with increased AD risk (66). The identified down- regulation of sialyl-
transferases (Fig.  9) provides a mechanism for driving the reduced 
overall sialylation in AD brain uncovered by this work (Figs. 1, H and 
I, and 3A, and table S4A). Additionally, we found that sialyltransferase 
ST6GAL1 was up- regulated in AD (Fig. 9), which could contribute to 
the formation of hypersialylated glycoforms detected in AD brain 
(Fig. 5, A and C, and table S6I). Our multiomics interrogations also 
revealed that N- acetyl- β- hexosaminidase HEXB and α- mannosidase 
MAN2B1, two enzymes that are involved in N- glycan truncation 
to generate paucimannose glycans on proteins (67, 68), were up-  
regulated in AD brain (Fig. 9), providing a mechanism for driving the 
increased paucimannosylation by H3N2, H2N2, and H1N2 glycans 
in AD brain (Fig. 3E and table S4C).
Compared to transcriptomics, proteomics studies have relatively 
less coverage of the proteome. Johnson et  al. (60) is the largest AD 
brain proteome dataset to date, but it still lacks expression data for 
many N- glycosylation- related genes, particularly for enzymes in-
volved in the N- glycan branching, elongation, fucosylation, and si-
alylation (Fig. 9). Despite the limitation, interrogation of proteomics 
datasets has revealed disease- associated changes in N- glycosylation 
enzymes not observed at the RNA level (Fig. 9). Consistent with this 
result, Johnson et al. (60) have identified a protein coexpression net-
work module, named M29 Glycosylation/ER, which was not pre-
served in the RNA network. The M29 Glycosylation/ER module had 
strong correlation to AD neuropathology and cognition phenotypes 
(60) and contained OST subunits (STT3B, RPN2, and DDOST), ER 
glycan- processing enzymes (GANAB, PRKCSH, and UGGT1), and 
ER lectins (MLEC, CANX, and LMAN2) (Fig. 9). By further inter -
rogation of the Johnson et al. dataset (60), we uncovered additional 
N- glycosylation- related proteins (STT3A, DAD1, TUSC3, UGGT2, 
MAN2A2, LMAN2L, OS9, ERLEC1, FUT9, HEXB, and MANBA) 
with significant correlation to cognitive function (MMSE30 score), 
Aβ pathology (CERAD score), and/or NFT pathology (Braak stage) 
(Fig. 9). In addition, interrogation of Aβ plaque and NFT proteomics 
datasets (69–71) revealed that some of the N- glycan modification en-
zymes (RPN1, DDOST, GANAB, PRKCSH, UGGT1, and HEXB) and 
ER lectin chaperones (CALR and CANX) were colocalized with Aβ 
plaques and NFTs in AD brain (Fig. 9). Collectively, the convergent 
evidence from multiomics analyses (Fig. 9) provides strong support 
for the involvement of dysregulated N- glycosylation machinery in 
driving glycoproteome remodeling and AD pathogenesis.
DISCUSSION
The present study is the first to use intact glycopeptide- based quanti-
tative glycoproteomics coupled with network biology to provide a 
systems- level view of protein glycoforms and site- specific glycan 
modifications in human brain and their changes in AD. We report the 
largest human brain glycoproteome to date with 10,731 N- glycoforms 
from 1184 glycoproteins carrying 164 distinct glycan compositions 
across 2544 glycosylation sites. The acquisition of such extensive gly-
coproteomic information is mainly attributed to the strength of our 
optimized intact glycoproteomics pipeline, including full extraction 
of proteins with strong detergent SDS (25), preparation of high- purity 
peptides by FASP (26), enrichment of intact glycopeptides using SAX- 
ERLIC, a more effective approach than lectin affinity enrichment 
methods for reducing the bias toward certain glycan moieties on gly-
copeptides (27), and SCE- HCD–based LC- MS/MS analysis (28). Our 
analyses reveal that oligomannosylation and fucosylation are two pre-
dominant types of glycan modification in human brain (Figs. 1, H and 
I, and 3A, and table S4A), consistent with previous glycoproteomic 
and glycomic results (20, 24, 33). Our study also shows that sialylation 
(including modifications by sialylated- only glycans and sialofucosyl-
ated glycans) is a common type of glycan modification in the brain, 
occurring at ~ 26% of total glycoforms (detection frequency) and 
~19% relative abundance (Figs. 1H and 3A and table S4A). By con-
trast, a recent glycoproteomic study using multi- lectin and HILIC 
enrichment reported a low occurrence of sialylation at <9% detection 
frequency in the brain (24), whereas the study by Tena et al. (32) using 
membrane fractions reported a predominance of sialylation (mostly 
sialofucosylation) at >70% relative abundance in the brain. The deep 
coverage of human brain glycoproteome achieved by our study pro-
vides fundamental information for understanding the roles of N-  
glycan modifications in brain health and disease.
Our deep glycoproteomic analysis extends our previous finding 
of altered N- glycosylation site occupancy in AD brain (23) and gen-
erates site- specific glyco- maps of N- glycans and glycoforms for hu-
man brain glycoproteins, including disease- relevant proteins such as 
GW AS- identified AD risk factors (e.g., CLU, SORL1, ABCA7, ACE, 
ADAM10, CNTNAP2, EPHA1, PLD3, and TM2D3) and other AD- 
related proteins (e.g., tau, nicastrin, and LRP1) in healthy and AD 
brains (Fig.  2, fig.  S7, and table  S2). The identified AD- associated 
changes in site- specific glycan modification patterns of these pro-
teins provides compelling evidence supporting the proposed role of 
aberrant N- glycosylation in AD pathogenesis (17, 18). The site-  
specific glyco- maps of AD- relevant proteins obtained from this work 
provide an important resource for future studies to determine func-
tional impacts of glycan modifications of these proteins in AD 
pathogenesis.
Consistent with our deglycoproteomics results (23), this study has 
identified many loss and gain of N- glycosylation sites in AD (Figs. 1C 
and 5, A and B, and tables S2 and S5C). The gain of N- glycosites could 
represent N- glycosylation of cryptic N- glycosites (i.e., normally un-
used N- glycosylation sequon) that become exposed due to protein 
folding changes induced by ER stress or other environmental and 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 07, 2026


===== PAGE BREAK =====

Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadk6911 (2024)     5 April 2024
Science Adv AnceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
18 of 25
genetic factors associated with AD (62), whereas the loss of N-  
glycosylation at the identified N- glycosites could result from altered 
folding of substrate proteins in AD, making these normally exposed 
N- glycosites inaccessible to modification by N- glycosylation enzymes 
in AD. Furthermore, the altered expression and activity of OST STT3A 
and STT3B complexes in AD revealed by multiomics interrogations 
(Fig. 9) and our previous study (23) provide another mechanism for 
driving AD- associated gain and loss of N- glycosites. In addition, 
alterations in dolichol- oligosaccharide synthesis enzymes identified 
in AD brain (23) could also contribute to the observed loss and gain 
of N- glycosites in AD. The finding of close correlations between 
protein levels of OST subunits (STT3A, STT3B, RPN2, DAD1, and 
TUSC3) and AD neuropathology and/or cognition phenotypes 
(Fig. 9), together with the identification of mutations in OST subunits 
(e.g., STT3A, STT3B, DAD1, and TUSC3) as the cause of congenital 
disorders of glycosylation with brain function abnormalities (15, 62), 
provides strong support for the critical role of OST dysfunction and 
N- glycosylation dysregulation in AD pathogenesis.
Our study reveals that reduced sialylation is a prominent feature of 
AD brain glycoproteome (Figs. 1, H and I, and 3A and table S4A). The 
observed reduction in overall sialylation in AD could be caused by 
down- regulated expression of sialyltransferases (e.g., ST3GAL3 and 
ST6GAL2) (Fig.  9) and decreased sialyltransferase activity in AD 
brain (72). GW AS identification of sialic acid–binding receptor CD33 
(also called Siglec- 3) as a risk factor for AD (73) underscores the im-
portance of studying protein sialylation in brain dysfunction in 
AD. Our analysis shows that reduced overall sialylation in AD (Fig. 3A 
and table  S4A) results mainly from disease- associated decreases in 
modification by 25 sialylated glycan compositions (Fig. 3, D and E). 
Moreover, we have identified 86 hyposialylated glycoforms from 39 
hyposialylated proteins and 60 hypersialylated glycoforms from 44 
hypersialylated proteins in AD (Fig. 5, A to C, and table S6, I and J). 
The observed protein-  and glycoform- specific hypersialylation (Fig. 5, 
A and C, and table S6I) could be caused by the identified up- regulation 
of sialyltransferase ST6GAL1 in AD (Fig.  9). Furthermore, β - site 
APP- cleaving enzyme- 1 (BACE1) has been shown to cleave ST6GAL1 
to generate a secreted form of enzymatically active sialyltransferase 
(74), which could also contribute to protein-  and glycoform- specific 
hypersialylation in AD. Our analyses have uncovered multiple bio-
logical processes affected by altered sialylation in AD, including cell 
adhesion, synaptic transmission, ECM function, cell surface receptor 
signaling, and lysosome function (Fig. 5, D to F , and table S7, I and J), 
providing mechanistic insights into the functional involvement of 
dysregulated protein sialylation in AD pathophysiology.
Our analyses have uncovered significant decreases in the overall 
levels of protein modifications by N- glycan with six or more HexNAc 
residues (Figs. 1, H and I, and 3B) and identified 21 glycan composi-
tions containing ≥ 6 HexNAc residues as down- regulated glycan 
modifications in AD (Fig.  3, D and E, and table  S4), indicating re-
duced N- glycan branching and/or elongation in AD brain. The in-
volvement of reduced N- glycan branching in AD is further supported 
by the identified down- regulation of N- glycan branching enzyme 
MGAT4C (Fig. 9) and association of SNPs in MGAT4B and MGAT5 
with AD risk (65, 66), and the involvement of reduced N- glycan 
elongation in AD is supported by the down- regulation of N- glycan 
elongation enzyme B3GALT2 (Fig. 9). Our study reveals a list of gly-
coproteins and glycoforms with reduced N- glycan branching and/or 
elongation in AD (Fig. 4, fig. S9, and table S5). These results, together 
with the reported roles of N- glycan branching and elongation in 
controlling cell surface protein function, endocytosis, inflammation, 
and neurodegeneration (75, 76), indicate that decreased N- glycan 
branching and elongation could be previously unknown pathogenic 
mechanisms contributing to endocytic trafficking dysregulation, neu-
roinflammation, and neurodegeneration in AD. Future studies are 
warranted to further investigate N- glycan branching and elongation 
aberrations and their roles in AD pathogenesis.
The observed predominance of protein oligomannosylation in hu-
man brain (Figs. 1, H and I, and 3A) is consistent with prior studies 
showing that unlike most tissues, brain contains high abundance of 
oligomannose glycans, which are concentrated at the synapse (33, 77). 
Our study reveals that, while the overall levels of oligomannosylation 
are unaltered in AD (Figs. 1, H and I, and 3A), H5N2 (Man5 glycan) 
modification is increased and H9N2 (Man9 glycan) modification is 
decreased in AD (Fig. 3, C to E). Furthermore, we have identified 187 
glycoforms and 107 glycoproteins with hyperoligomannosylation 
and 36 glycoforms and 29 glycoproteins with hypo- oligomannosylation 
in AD (Fig. 5, A to C, and table S6, C and D). Glucose- trimming 
and oligomannose glycan processing in the ER are intimately linked 
to protein folding, trafficking, and quality control, with different 
oligomannose- containing glycans serving as distinct sorting signals 
for protein folding, ER- to- Golgi trafficking, or ERAD (9, 63). The al-
terations in ER glycan- processing enzymes (e.g., MOGS, GANAB, 
PRKCSH, UGGT1, and UGGT2) and ER lectins for binding various 
oligomannose- containing glycan sorting signals (e.g., MLEC, CANX, 
CALR, LMAN2/VIP36, and ERLEC1/XTP3B) and their association 
with AD phenotypes uncovered by multiomics interrogations (Fig. 9), 
together with GW AS- identified association of SNPs in CANX and 
EDEM2 with AD risk (65, 66), provide molecular mechanisms for 
driving the protein-  and glycan- specific changes in oligomannosyl-
ation observed in AD brain. Our results indicate that disease-  
associated hyperoligomannosylation and hypo- oligomannosylation 
both affect plasma membrane and extracellular proteins involved in 
cell adhesion, transmembrane signaling, and inflammation in AD 
(Fig. 5, D to F , and table S7, C and D). However, only hyperoligoman-
nosylation, but not hypo- oligomannosylation, is significantly associ-
ated with proteins localized to the synapse, ER, and lysosome to affect 
synaptic transmission, ER function, and lysosomal processes (Fig. 5, 
D to F). Collectively, our findings provide mechanistic insights into 
the functional involvement of dysregulated protein oligomannosyl-
ation in AD pathophysiology.
This study shows that protein paucimannosylation is a signifi-
cant feature of human brain glycoproteome, occurring at ~4% of 
total glycoforms, ~ 9% of total glycosites, and ~ 2.5% relative abun-
dance (Figs. 1, H and I, and 3A). Paucimannosylation was initially 
thought to be an invertebrate-  and plant- specific type of glycosyl-
ation (78), but accumulating evidence indicates that paucimanno-
sylation also occurs in vertebrates, particularly in the mammalian 
brain (41, 67). Recent studies have shown that protein pauciman-
nosylation is mediated by an N- acetyl- β- hexosaminidase–dependent 
truncation pathway (68) and paucimannose glycans on glycopro-
teins can be further truncated to form chitobiose core–type glycans 
(67). Our finding of increased modifications by paucimannose gly-
cans (H1N2, H2N2, and H3N2) and chitobiose core–type glycans 
(N1 and N2) in AD brain (Fig. 3E and table S4C) indicates an in-
volvement of elevated N- glycan truncation in AD. Corroborating 
with our finding, a glycomic study reported an association of AD 
neuropathology with a shift to smaller N- glycans with lower m /z 
values (79). Our multiomics interrogations reveal that the observed 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 07, 2026


===== PAGE BREAK =====

Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadk6911 (2024)     5 April 2024
Science Adv AnceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
19 of 25
increases in paucimannosylation (Fig. 3E) could be caused by the 
up- regulated expression of N - acetyl- β- hexosaminidase HEXB and 
α- mannosidase MAN2B1 in AD (Fig. 9). Furthermore, our work 
has identified a list of glycoproteins and glycoforms with altered 
paucimannosylation in AD brain (Fig. 5, A to C, and table S6, E and 
F) and uncovered hyperpaucimannosylation- affected processes in 
AD, including neuroinflammation, synaptic dysfunction, cell adhe-
sion alteration, Golgi dysfunction, and cell signaling dysregulation 
(Fig. 5, D to F , and table S7E), highlighting a previously overlooked 
connection between dysregulation of protein paucimannosylation 
and AD pathogenesis.
This work demonstrates that protein fucosylation is a predomi-
nant type of glycan modification in the human brain, occurring at 
~41% of total glycoforms, ~60% of total glycosites, and 39% relative 
abundance (Figs. 1, H and I, and 3A). These numbers may represent 
an underestimation of total fucosylation in the brain because glycans 
with two or more fucoses were omitted from our analysis to reduce 
glycopeptide misassignments due to Fuc(2) versus NeuAc(1) ambi-
guities. Previous glycomics analyses have found glycan structures 
with two or multiple fucoses in the brain, although they represent a 
minor contribution compared to glycans with a single fucose (20, 33). 
Despite this limitation, our finding of a predominance of protein fu-
cosylation in human brain (Figs. 1, H and I, and 3A) is in line with the 
reported high abundance of fucosylated N- glycans in the brain with 
crucial roles in regulation of synaptic plasticity and cognitive process-
es ( 33, 80). Our analyses reveal an increase in modification by 
fucosylated- only glycans and a decrease in modification by sialofu-
cosylated glycans, resulting in no significant change in overall fucosyl-
ation in AD brain (Fig. 1, H and I; fig. S6; Fig. 3A; and table S4A). 
Furthermore, we have identified 188 glycoforms and 83 glycoproteins 
with hyperfucosylation and 83 glycoforms and 44 glycoproteins with 
hypofucosylation in AD (Fig. 5, A to C, and table S6, G and H). The 
elucidation of multiple biological processes and pathways affected by 
disease- associated hyperfucosylation and hypofucosylation (Fig. 5, D 
to F , and table S7, G and H) provides evidence linking altered fucosyl-
ation to AD pathophysiology.
This work establishes glycan modification coregulation network 
analysis as an approach to analyze complex datasets of intact glyco-
proteomics. Unlike differential analysis that determines abundance 
changes of individual glycan modifications independently, coregula-
tion network analysis relates glycan modifications to one another using 
pairwise correlation relationships between glycan modification pro-
files to illuminate higher- order organization and define modules of 
coregulated glycan modifications that are functionally related and/or 
coordinately regulated. Using this network analysis, we have uncov-
ered an organization of human brain glycome (164 glycan composi-
tions) into eight modules of coregulated glycan modifications (Fig. 6, 
A and B, and table  S8). We have identified three disease- associated 
glycan modules that are significantly correlated with AD clinico-
pathological phenotypes, including two negatively correlated modules 
(GNM1 and GNM4) enriched with sialylated glycans and highly 
branched or elongated glycans as well as one positively correlated 
module (GNM2) enriched with oligomannose, paucimannose, chito-
biose core glycans, bisecting GlcNAc- containing glycans, and undeco-
rated complex/hybrid glycans with relatively simple, neutral structures 
(Fig. 6 and table S8). Our glycan network analysis reveals previously 
unknown coregulation relationships among different glycan modifica-
tions in human brain (Fig. 6D and table S8) and highlights an involve-
ment of glycan- specific elevations in oligomannosylation, undecorated 
complex/hybrid modification, bisection, paucimannosylation, and 
chitobiose core modification and reductions in sialylation and N-  
glycan branching and/or elongation in AD pathophysiology. These 
results illustrate the value of glycan coregulation network analysis for 
generating systems- level insights into glycan modifications in health 
and disease.
Another useful approach established by this work is the intact gly-
coproteomics data- driven glycoform coregulation network analysis, 
which reveals an organization of human brain glycoproteome into 21 
modules of coregulated protein glycoforms (Fig. 7 and table S9). The 
human brain glycoform network shows little overlap with our previ-
ously reported proteomic (31) and deglycoproteomic (23) networks, 
indicating that glycoform coregulation, protein coexpression, and N- 
glycosylation site occupancy are controlled by distinct mechanisms. 
Our study has identified seven disease- associated, glycoform mod-
ules with significant correlations to AD phenotypes, including five 
positively correlated modules (GFM1, GFM2, GFM4, GFM11, and 
GFM19) and two negatively correlated modules (GFM3 and GFM14) 
(Fig. 7 and fig. S8). Our analyses have generated a molecular blue-
print of human brain glycoforms and site- specific glycan modifica-
tion networks in AD brain and uncovered a number of dysregulated 
glycan modification- affected processes and pathways, including al-
terations in cell adhesion and synapse organization, matrisome dys-
function, neuroinflammation, synaptic dysfunction, impaired brain 
cell ion homeostasis, cell signaling dysregulation, ER and Golgi dys-
function, endocytic trafficking dysregulation, and lysosomal dys-
function (Figs.  7 and 8 and tables  S9 and S10). The identified 
disease- associated networks, pathways, and hub glycoforms provide 
attractive targets for AD biomarker and therapeutic development.
While sex is known to affect N- glycosylation profiles in the plas-
ma (81), recent studies have reported that sex has a minimal impact 
on N- glycosylation profiles in the brain compared to the plasma (24, 
33). Consistent with these reports, our analyses have shown that sex 
has no significant effect on N- glycosylation profiles in human brain 
(fig. S5) or N- glycan modification changes in AD brain (Figs. 3E and 
4D). Furthermore, module- trait correlation analyses have demon-
strated that none of the glycan modules (fig. S10) or AD- associated 
glycoform modules (fig. S11) has any significant correlation to sex. 
Together, these data provide strong evidence supporting that the 
disease- associated N- glycan modification changes and glycoform 
network alterations in AD brain uncovered by this study is not due to 
sex as a confounding factor.
We note that current glycoproteomics methods can only provide 
glycan compositions but not glycan structures as the site- specific gly-
can information, which limits insight into glycan structural diversity 
as a single glycan composition may represent multiple glycan struc-
tures (34). Another limitation of glycoproteomics is the challenge in 
correct assignment of glycopeptides bearing glycan compositions 
with similar masses, such as NeuAc(1) versus Fuc(2). To reduce the 
misassignments, we did not consider glycans with two or more fu-
coses in our analysis. In addition, quantitative glycoproteomics is lim-
ited by the occurrence of missing data, such as missing glycopeptide 
identifications or abundance values (82). Although our quantitative 
analyses have identified 677 altered glycoforms in AD (Fig. 5, A and 
B, and table S6, A and B), some important glycoform changes may 
have been missed as a result of excluding intact glycopeptides with 
missing values in >50% of the samples in our analyses. Furthermore, 
the relatively small sample size used in this study only allowed detec-
tion of disease- associated glycosylation changes with a large effect 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 07, 2026


===== PAGE BREAK =====

Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadk6911 (2024)     5 April 2024
Science Adv AnceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
20 of 25
size, and more subtle changes may have been missed (83). Despite 
these limitations, we anticipate that the methodologies and findings 
presented here will facilitate further studies of disease- associated gly-
coforms and site- specific glycan changes in AD.
In summary, our work has established the integration of intact 
glycopeptide- based quantitative glycoproteomics with network biol-
ogy as a paradigm for analyzing proteome- wide changes in site-  
specific glycan modifications in AD. This approach can be broadly 
applied to study glycan modification alterations in other human dis-
eases or in different stress conditions. Our comprehensive and quan-
titative glycoproteomics data of healthy human brains and AD 
patients have revealed previously unknown disease signatures of al-
tered glycoforms and site- specific glycan modifications in AD and 
will serve as a valuable resource to facilitate future investigations into 
the roles of glycan modifications in normal brain physiology and AD 
pathophysiology. The identified glycan modification aberrations and 
brain glycoform and glycan network alterations provide mechanistic 
insights into AD pathogenesis and pave the way forward for develop-
ing glycosylation- based therapies and biomarkers to combat this 
devastating disease.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Human brain sample preparation
Postmortem brain tissues were acquired with informed consent from 
the donors or their family and provided by the Emory Center for 
Neurodegenerative Disease Brain Bank. All experiments were con-
ducted in accordance with the U.S. National Institutes of Health 
(NIH) guidelines for research involving human tissues and with the 
ethical standards and principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. For 
intact glycoproteomics analysis, we used the same sets of dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex samples from AD and age- matched control cases as 
described in our previous proteomics and deglycoproteomics studies 
(23, 31). The case information and neuropathological data, including 
age, sex, disease status, disease duration, Aβ  pathology CERAD 
score, neurofibrillary tangle Braak stage, ApoE genotype, and post-
mortem interval (PMI), can be found in table  S1. Power analysis 
showed that the sample size used in this study (n  = 16 AD and con-
trol cases) has >80% power at a two- sided type I error rate of 5% to 
detect an effect size of at least 1.6. The samples used in this study were 
a neighboring piece of tissue from the same brain region used in our 
previous publications (23, 31). For glycoproteomics sample prepara-
tion, human brain tissue (25 mg per AD or control case) was homog-
enized in 150 μl of lysis buffer containing 4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, and 
100 mM tris- HCl (pH 7.6) at 95°C, and proteins were extracted as we 
described previously (25, 31). Protein extracts were processed by fol-
lowing the FASP protocol with the Microcon 30- kDa centrifugal fil-
ter device (MRCF0R030, Merck) for detergent removal, cysteine 
alkylation by iodoacetamide, trypsin digestion, and peptide purifica-
tion (25, 26). Peptide concentrations were determined by UV spec-
trometry as previously described (31), and purified peptides were 
dried under vacuum.
Enrichment of intact glycopeptides by SAX- ERLIC
Purified peptides from each brain sample (200 μ g of peptides per 
sample) were reconstituted in 60 μl of 50% acetonitrile (ACN) and 
0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in H 2O. Intact glycopeptides were 
enriched by using ERLIC with SAX solid- phase extraction (SAX-  
ERLIC) as previously described (27) with minor modification. Briefly, 
SOLA- AX Solid Phase Extraction (SPE) cartridges (10 mg sorbent 
per cartridge, Thermo Fisher Scientific) were equilibrated three times 
with 1 ml of ACN, three times with 100 mM triethylammonium ace-
tate (pH 7.0), and three times with loading buffer (95% ACN and 1% 
TFA in H2O). Peptides were diluted in 1 ml of loading buffer and 
loaded onto the SPE cartridge, and the flow- through was collected 
and loaded again onto the cartridge. After washing the cartridge with 
1 ml of loading buffer three times, the bound glycopeptides were elut-
ed in two 600- μl aliquots of elution buffer (50% ACN and 0.1% TFA). 
The eluted glycopeptides were dried under vacuum and stored at 
−20°C for further analysis.
Intact glycopeptide- based mass spectrometric analysis
LC- MS/MS glycoproteomic analysis of intact glycopeptides was 
performed using a Q- Exactive HF- X Orbitrap mass spectrometer 
equipped with a nano- spray source and a nano- LC UltiMate 3000 
high- performance liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific). Intact glycopeptides were separated by online reversed-  
phase- HPLC fractionation on an in- house packed column (30 cm × 
100 μm; packed with 3 μ m Reprosil- Pur C18- AQ beads from Dr. 
Maisch, Ammerbuch- Entringen, Germany), using a linear gradient 
from 3% to 40% solvent B over 120 min at a flow rate of 350 nl/min 
(mobile phase A, 2% ACN, 98% H2O, 0.1% FA; mobile phase B, 80% 
ACN, 20% H2O, 0.1% FA). The mass spectrometer was operated in 
the data- dependent acquisition mode. Full MS scans were acquired 
from m/z 800 to 2000 at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200 with an au-
tomatic gain control target of 1 × 10 6 ions and maximum ion accumu-
lation time of 50 ms. The 15 most abundant ions were selected from 
each full MS scan and fragmented with HCD using an SCE setting of 
18%/28%/38%. SCE- HCD- MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolu-
tion of 15,000 at m /z 200 with an automatic gain control target of 
20,000 ions and maximum ion accumulation time of 60 ms.
Database search and intact glycopeptide identification
MS raw data were processed by searching against the UniProt human 
protein database (2016_02 Release, 20,198 reviewed entries) and a 
Byonic built- in glycan database of 182 human N- glycans using Byon-
ic software version 3.11.3 (Protein Metrics) (29, 30). The Byonic 
182 human N- glycan database, which does not contain glycan com-
positions with two or more fucoses, has been widely used in glyco-
proteomics studies of human cells and patient specimens (84– 86). 
Searches were conducted with the fragmentation type set to HCD and 
mass tolerance setting of 20 ppm for both precursor and fragment 
ions. Trypsin was selected as the proteolytic enzyme with a maximum 
of two missed cleavages allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine 
(+57.021464 Da) was set as a fixed modification, and the variable 
modifications included the following: N- glycosylation of asparagine 
residue localized within the sequon N- X- S|T (X  ≠  P), oxidation of 
methionine (+15.994915 Da), and deamidation of asparagine and 
glutamine (+0.984016 Da). N- glycosylation and deamidation were 
set as “common” modification, and oxidation was set as “rare” modi-
fication. A total of two common modifications and one rare modifica-
tion were allowed per identified peptide. The search output was 
filtered to <1% false discovery rate (FDR) using the FDR 2D score, a 
Byonic- computed FDR value based on a two- dimensional target- 
decoy strategy that estimates and controls peptide- spectrum match 
(PSM)–and protein- level FDRs simultaneously (29, 87). The filtered 
data were further assessed using the posterior error probability (PEP) 
2D score, a comprehensive measure of error probability by taking into 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 07, 2026


===== PAGE BREAK =====

Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadk6911 (2024)     5 April 2024
Science Adv AnceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
21 of 25
account 10 different Byonic parameters, including the Byonic score, 
delta, precursor mass error, and digestion specificity (29, 30). Only the 
N- glycopeptides with FDR 2D score < 0.01 and PEP 2D score  < 0.05 
were included in data analysis.
Quantitative analysis of glycopeptides and 
N- glycan modifications
Quantification of intact N- glycopeptides was performed by using Byo-
logic software version 3.11.3 (Protein Metrics), which uses inputs from 
both MS1 raw data and Byonic search results to determine glycopep-
tide intensities (30). The Byologic quantification results were filtered to 
FDR 2D score < 0.01 and PEP 2D score < 0.05. For quantitative analy-
sis of N- glycan modifications, glycopeptides were grouped by their 
glycan composition or glycan type, and the relative abundance of gly-
can modification for each glycan category was determined by the 
summed intensities of glycopeptides for the glycan category normal-
ized by total intensities of glycopeptides for all N- glycan modifications 
in each sample. Significance of difference in relative abundances of 
glycan modification for each glycan category between AD and control 
brains was assessed using unpaired two- tailed Student’s t test with 
P  < 0.05 as the confidence threshold. Unsupervised hierarchical clus-
tering based on the relative abundances of glycan modifications in 
each sample was performed as we described previously (31).
Differential glycoform abundance analysis and identification 
of glycoforms with altered N- glycosylation in AD
The abundance of a site- specific glycoform was determined by sum-
ming the intensities of intact glycopeptides with the same glycan 
composition at the same glycosylation site within the same protein. 
Glycoform abundance values were converted to log2 scale and nor-
malized by applying median- centered normalization. Differential 
abundance analysis was performed using the normalized abundanc-
es of glycoforms with valid abundance values in ≥50% of biological 
replicates per group by using an empirical Bayes approach with the 
limma R package (88, 89). Glycoforms with altered abundance in AD 
were identified by using limma moderated t test with thresholds of 
±1.3- fold change over the control (i.e., AD/control ratio  >1.3 or 
<0.77) and P  < 0.05. The q value was used to correct for multiple 
hypothesis testing and estimate the FDRs as previously described 
(90). Unsupervised hierarchical clustering based on the normalized 
glycoform abundances in each sample was performed as previously 
described (31), and the clustered cases and glycoforms were visual-
ized along with the corresponding N- glycan types using the Heat-
mapper software (91). In addition to the quantitative analysis for 
identification of glycoforms with altered N- glycan modification lev-
els, glycoforms with a gain of a site- specific N- glycan modification in 
AD were identified as the glycoforms detected in ≥50% of AD cases 
but not in any of the control cases, and glycoforms with a complete 
loss of a site- specific N- glycan modification in AD were identified as 
the glycoforms detected in ≥ 50% of control cases but not in any of 
the AD cases. Hyperglycosylated glycoforms were defined as the gly-
coforms with increased or a gain of site- specific N- glycan modifica-
tion in AD, whereas hypoglycosylated glycoforms were those with 
decreased or a loss of site- specific N- glycan modification in AD.
Multiomics interrogation for altered N- glycosylation 
enzymes and regulators in AD
Changes in RNA expression profiles of N- glycan modification en-
zymes and regulators in AD brain were assessed in the transcriptome 
datasets from ROSMAP , MSSM, and Mayo studies by using a public 
resource of AD transcriptome differential expression meta- analysis 
(56). Changes in protein expression profiles of N- glycosylation- 
related genes in AD brain were investigated in our published pro-
teome dataset from the same cohort (31) and five other AD brain 
proteome datasets (57–61) by using the lists of differentially expressed 
proteins in AD versus control obtained from these studies. N- glycan 
modification enzymes or regulators with significant (P  < 0.05) corre-
lation to AD neuropathological or cognitive trait were identified using 
individual protein- trait correlation data from Johnson et  al. ( 60). 
GW AS associations of N- glycosylation enzymes and regulators with 
AD were assessed in AD GW AS meta- analysis datasets using the SNP 
summary statistics (65, 66). Associations of N- glycosylation enzymes 
and regulators with AD neuropathological hallmarks amyloid plaques 
and neurofibrillary tangles were evaluated by the overlap with pro-
teins that colocalize with amyloid plaques or neurofibrillary tangles in 
localized proteomics analyses (69–71).
Glycan modification coregulation network analysis
Data- driven glycan modification coregulation network analysis was 
performed by using WGCNA algorithm (42) to construct a human 
brain glycan network from the glycan modification abundance pro-
files of 164 glycan compositions. We used WGCNA package in R (42) 
to calculate a correlation matrix for all pairwise correlations of glycan 
modification abundances across all AD and control samples and then 
transformed it into a weighted adjacency matrix with a soft threshold 
power of 6 according to the scale- free topology criterion (42). The 
weighted adjacency matrix was used to generate a topological overlap 
(TO) matrix, and hierarchical clustering of glycans was performed us-
ing 1  − TO as the distance measure. Modules of coregulated glycan 
modifications were identified using dynamic tree- cutting with the fol-
lowing parameters: minimal module size  = 5, deepSplit  = 4, merge 
cut height  = 0.07, and a reassignment threshold of P  < 0.05. Glycan 
coregulation module networks were graphically depicted by using the 
Cytoscape v.3.5.0 software (92).
Glycoform coregulation network analysis
The intact glycoproteomics dataset was filtered for N- glycoforms 
with valid abundance values in ≥50% of AD or control samples, and 
the missing abundance values were imputed using the k- nearest 
neighbors imputation function in the DAPAR software (93). Glyco-
form coregulation network analysis was performed using the WGCNA 
package in R (42) to generate a correlation matrix for all pairwise 
correlations of glycoform abundances across all samples followed by 
transformation into a weighted adjacency matrix using a soft thresh-
old power of 10. Glycoforms were hierarchically clustered using the 
TO- based dissimilarity, and modules of coregulated glycoforms 
were identified by dynamic tree- cutting with parameters set as min-
imal module size  = 30, deepSplit  = 4, merge cut height  = 0.07, and 
a reassignment threshold of P < 0.05. Glycoform coregulation mod-
ule networks were graphically depicted by using the igraph software 
package (94).
Analysis of inter- modular relationships and 
module- trait associations
For each module in the glycan or glycoform coregulation network, we 
computed a module eigenglycan or eigenglycoform as the first princi-
pal component of the coregulated glycans or glycoforms in the mod-
ule according to the definition of eigennode (42). Pearson correlation 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 07, 2026


===== PAGE BREAK =====

Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadk6911 (2024)     5 April 2024
Science Adv AnceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
22 of 25
between each glycan or glycoform and the module eigenglycan or ei-
genglycoform was used to determine module membership kME, a 
measure of intramodular connectivity (45, 95). Hub glycans or glyco-
forms for each module were identified as the glycans or glycoforms 
with kME  > 0.8. Inter- modular relationships between glycan or glyco-
form coregulation network modules were determined on the basis of 
pairwise correlations between module eigenglycans or eigenglyco-
forms as previously described (95, 96). Module- trait association anal-
ysis was performed as previously described (31) using biweight 
midcorrelations between each module eigenglycan or eigenglycoform 
and each clinical or neuropathological trait and the correspond-
ing P values.
GO and cell- type marker enrichment analyses
GO enrichment analysis of the generated datasets of differentially N- 
glycosylated proteins and glycoform network modules was performed 
using MetaCore bioinformatics software (version 6.37, build 69,500) 
as previously described (31), with the total list of all proteins (includ-
ing glycoproteins) identified in our human brain samples as the back-
ground and FDR- corrected P  <  0.05 as the significance threshold. 
Enrichment analysis for markers of major brain cell types (astrocyte, 
microglia, neuron, and oligodendrocyte) in glycoform network mod-
ules was performed as previously described (23). Significance was de-
termined using one- sided Fisher’s exact test followed by correction for 
multiple comparisons using the Benjamini- Hochberg FDR adjust-
ment method (97).
Statistical analyses
The sample size used in this study was determined based on power 
analysis and our prior studies (23, 31). Significance of difference in 
group means between AD and control cases was assessed by unpaired 
two- tailed Student’s t test, limma moderated t test, or Kruskal- Wallis 
test as indicated. For data visualization, heatmaps with Z score values 
of normalized abundances were generated using the Heatmapper tool 
(91). Glycan or glycoform coregulation network analysis was per -
formed using the WGCNA algorithm (42) to define network modules 
of coregulated glycans or glycoforms. Module- trait association was 
assessed by biweight midcorrelation between each module eigengly-
can or eigenglycoform and each trait with P  < 0.05 as the confidence 
threshold. Enrichment analyses were performed with one- sided Fish-
er’s exact test to calculate P values. Correction for multiple compari-
sons was performed using the q  value (90) or Benjamini- Hochberg 
FDR adjustment method (97) as indicated.
Supplementary Materials
This PDF file includes:
Figs. S1 to S11
table S1
l egends for tables S2 to S10
Other Supplementary Material for this manuscript includes the following:
tables S2 to S10
REFERENCES AND NOTES
 1. P . Scheltens, B. de Strooper, M. Kivipelto, h. holstege, G. chetelat, c. e . teunissen,  
J. c ummings, W. M. van der Flier, Alzheimer's disease. Lancet 397, 1577–1590 (2021).
 2. G. M. McKhann, d. S. Knopman, h. chertkow, B. t. h yman, c. R. Jack Jr., c. h. Kawas,  
W. e. Klunk, W. J. Koroshetz, J. J. Manly, R. Mayeux, R. c. Mohs, J. c. Morris, M. n. Rossor,  
P . Scheltens, M. c. carrillo, B. t hies, S. Weintraub, c. h. Phelps, t he diagnosis of dementia 
due to Alzheimer's disease: Recommendations from the national institute on 
Aging- Alzheimer's Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer's 
disease. Alzheimers Dement. 7, 263–269 (2011).
 3. J. verheijen, K. Sleegers, Understanding alzheimer disease at the interface between 
genetics and transcriptomics. Trends Genet. 34, 434–447 (2018).
 4. S. J. Andrews, B. Fulton- howard, A. Goate, interpretation of risk loci from genome- wide 
association studies of Alzheimer's disease. Lancet Neurol. 19, 326–335 (2020).
 5. G. M. Sancesario, S. Bernardini, Alzheimer's disease in the omics era. Clin. Biochem. 59, 
9–16 (2018).
 6. M. M. Muller, Post- translational modifications of protein backbones: Unique functions, 
mechanisms, and challenges. Biochemistry 57, 177–185 (2018).
 7. l. M. Smith, n. l. Kelleher, c onsortium for top d own Proteomics, Proteoform: A single 
term describing protein complexity. Nat. Methods 10, 186–187 (2013).
 8. K. t . Schjoldager, Y. narimatsu, h. J. Joshi, h. clausen, Global view of human protein 
glycosylation pathways and functions. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 21, 729–749 (2020).
 9. K. W. Moremen, M. t iemeyer, A. v. nairn, vertebrate protein glycosylation: diversity, 
synthesis and function. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 13, 448–462 (2012).
 10. F. Schwarz, M. Aebi, Mechanisms and principles of n- linked protein glycosylation. Curr. 
Opin. Struct. Biol. 21, 576–582 (2011).
 11. P . Stanley, K. W. Moremen, n. e. l ewis, n. taniguchi, M. Aebi, chapter 9 n-  glycans, in 
Essentials of Glycobiology, A. varki, R. d. c ummings, J. d. esko, P . Stanley, G. W. hart, M. 
Aebi, d. Mohnen, t . Kinoshita, n. h. Packer, J. h. Prestegard, R. l. Schnaar, P . h. Seeberger, 
eds. (c old Spring harbor laboratory Press, 2022), pp. 103–116.
 12. h. Kaltner, J. Abad- Rodriguez, A. P . corfield, J. Kopitz, h. J. Gabius, t he sugar code: l etters 
and vocabulary, writers, editors and readers and biosignificance of functional 
glycan- lectin pairing. Biochem. J. 476, 2623–2655 (2019).
 13. h. Scott, v. M. Panin, t he role of protein n- glycosylation in neural transmission. 
Glycobiology 24, 407–417 (2014).
 14. v . Sytnyk, i. l eshchyns'ka, M. Schachner, neural glycomics: t he sweet side of nervous 
system functions. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 78, 93–116 (2021).
 15. h. h. Freeze, e . A. eklund, B. G. ng, M. c. Patterson, neurological aspects of human 
glycosylation disorders. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 38, 105–125 (2015).
 16. t . Stambuk, M. Klasic, v. Zoldos, G. lauc, n-  glycans as functional effectors of genetic and 
epigenetic disease risk. Mol. Aspects Med. 79, 100891 (2021).
 17. S. Schedin- Weiss, B. Winblad, l. O. tjernberg, t he role of protein glycosylation in 
Alzheimer disease. FEBS J. 281, 46–62 (2014).
 18. Y. Kizuka, S. Kitazume, n. taniguchi, n-  glycan and Alzheimer's disease. Biochim. Biophys. 
Acta. Gen. Subj. 1861, 2447–2454 (2017).
 19. h. haukedal, K. K. Freude, i mplications of glycosylation in Alzheimer's disease. Front. 
Neurosci. 14, 625348 (2020).
 20. S. Gaunitz, l. O. tjernberg, S. Schedin-  Weiss, t he n-  glycan profile in cortex and 
hippocampus is altered in Alzheimer disease. J. Neurochem. 159, 292–304 (2021).
 21. M. Frenkel- Pinter, M. d. Shmueli, c. Raz, M. Yanku, S. Zilberzwige, e. Gazit, d. Segal, 
interplay between protein glycosylation pathways in Alzheimer's disease. Sci. Adv. 3, 
e1601576 (2017).
 22. S. t . Gizaw, t . Ohashi, M. tanaka, h. h inou, S. nishimura, Glycoblotting method allows for 
rapid and efficient glycome profiling of human Alzheimer's disease brain, serum and 
cerebrospinal fluid towards potential biomarker discovery. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1860, 
1716–1727 (2016).
 23. Q. Zhang, c. Ma, l. S. chin, l. li, i ntegrative glycoproteomics reveals protein n- 
glycosylation aberrations and glycoproteomic network alterations in Alzheimer's disease. 
Sci. Adv. 6, eabc5802 (2020).
 24. S. Suttapitugsakul, K. Stavenhagen, S. donskaya, d. A. Bennett, R. G. Mealer, n. t . Seyfried, 
R. d. c ummings, Glycoproteomics landscape of asymptomatic and symptomatic human 
Alzheimer's disease brain. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 21, 100433 (2022).
 25. Q. Zhang, c. Ma, l. li, l. S. chin, differential analysis of n-  glycopeptide abundance and 
n-  glycosylation site occupancy for studying protein n- glycosylation dysregulation in 
human disease. Bio. Protoc. 11, e4059 (2021).
 26. J. R. Wisniewski, Filter- aided sample preparation: t he versatile and efficient method for 
proteomic analysis. Methods Enzymol. 585, 15–27 (2017).
 27. S. M. totten, c. l. Feasley, A. Bermudez, S. J. Pitteri, Parallel comparison of n- linked 
glycopeptide enrichment techniques reveals extensive glycoproteomic analysis of 
plasma enabled by SAX- eRlic. J. Proteome Res. 16, 1249–1260 (2017).
 28. Y. Wang, Z. t ian, new energy setup strategy for intact n- glycopeptides characterization 
using higher- energy collisional dissociation. J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 31, 651–657 (2020).
 29. M. Bern, Y. J. Kil, c. Becker, Byonic: Advanced peptide and protein identification software. 
Curr. Protoc. Bioinformatics 40, 13.20.1–13.20.14 (2012).
 30. A. Roushan, G. M. Wilson, d. Kletter, K. i. Sen, W. tang, Y. J. Kil, e. c arlson, M. Bern, Peak 
filtering, peak annotation, and wildcard search for glycoproteomics. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 
20, 100011 (2020).
 31. Q. Zhang, c. Ma, M. Gearing, P . G. Wang, l. S. chin, l. li, i ntegrated proteomics and 
network analysis identifies protein hubs and network alterations in Alzheimer's disease. 
Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 6, 19 (2018).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 07, 2026


===== PAGE BREAK =====

Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadk6911 (2024)     5 April 2024
Science Adv AnceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
23 of 25
 32. J. tena, i. Maezawa, M. Barboza, M. Wong, c. Zhu, M. R. Alvarez, l. W. Jin, A. M. Zivkovic,  
c. B. l ebrilla, Regio- specific n- glycome and n- glycoproteome map of the elderly human 
brain with and without Alzheimer's disease. Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 21, 100427 
(2022).
 33. S. e. Williams, M. noel, S. l ehoux, M. c etinbas, R. J. Xavier, R. i. Sadreyev, e. M. Scolnick,  
J. W. Smoller, R. d. c ummings, R. G. Mealer, Mammalian brain glycoproteins exhibit 
diminished glycan complexity compared to other tissues. Nat. Commun. 13, 275 (2022).
 34. S. Suttapitugsakul, F. Sun, R. Wu, Recent advances in glycoproteomic analysis by mass 
spectrometry. Anal. Chem. 92, 267–291 (2020).
 35. Y. Kizuka, n. taniguchi, neural functions of bisecting GlcnAc. Glycoconj. J. 35, 345–351 
(2018).
 36. e . M. Foster, A. dangla- valls, S. l ovestone, e. M. Ribe, n. J. Buckley, clusterin in Alzheimer's 
disease: Mechanisms, genetics, and lessons from other pathologies. Front. Neurosci. 13, 
164 (2019).
 37. d . c ampion, c. charbonnier, G. n icolas, SORl1 genetic variants and Alzheimer disease 
risk: A literature review and meta- analysis of sequencing data. Acta Neuropathol. 138, 
173–186 (2019).
 38. e . l ouwersheimer, P . e. c ohn- hokke, Y. A. Pijnenburg, M. M. Weiss, e. A. Sistermans,  
A. J. Rozemuller, M. hulsman, J. c. van Swieten, c. M. van d uijn, F. Barkhof, t. Koene,  
P . Scheltens, W. M. van der Flier, h. holstege, Rare genetic variant in SORl1 may increase 
penetrance of Alzheimer’s disease in a family with several generations of APOe- ɛ4 
homozygosity. J. Alzheimers Dis. 56, 63–74 (2017).
 39. M. Shinohara, M. tachibana, t. Kanekiyo, G. Bu, Role of lRP1 in the pathogenesis of 
Alzheimer's disease: evidence from clinical and preclinical studies. J. Lipid Res. 58, 
1267–1281 (2017).
 40. J. n. Rauch, G. l una, e. Guzman, M. Audouard, c. challis, Y. e. Sibih, c. l eshuk,  
i. hernandez, S. Wegmann, B. t. h yman, v. Gradinaru, M. Kampmann, K. S. Kosik, lRP1 is a 
master regulator of tau uptake and spread. Nature 580, 381–385 (2020).
 41. t . S. Klaric, M. Salopek, v. Micek, O. Gornik Kljaic, G. lauc, Post- natal developmental 
changes in the composition of the rat neocortical n-  glycome. Glycobiology 31, 636–648 
(2021).
 42. P . langfelder, S. horvath, WGcnA: An R package for weighted correlation network 
analysis. BMC Bioinformatics 9, 559 (2008).
 43. B. Zhang, S. horvath, A general framework for weighted gene co- expression network 
analysis. Stat. Appl. Genet. Mol. Biol. 4, 17 (2005).
 44. c. c. liu, c. c. liu, t . Kanekiyo, h. Xu, G. Bu, Apolipoprotein e and Alzheimer disease: Risk, 
mechanisms and therapy. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 9, 106–118 (2013).
 45. P . langfelder, P . S. Mischel, S. horvath, When is hub gene selection better than standard 
meta- analysis? PLOS ONE 8, e61505 (2013).
 46. A. l. Barabasi, Z. n. Oltvai, network biology: Understanding the cell's functional 
organization. Nat. Rev. Genet. 5, 101–113 (2004).
 47. J. R. Sanes, S. l. Zipursky, Synaptic specificity, recognition molecules, and assembly of 
neural circuits. Cell 181, 1434–1435 (2020).
 48. t . c. Sudhof, t he cell biology of synapse formation. J. Cell Biol. 220, e202103052 (2021).
 49. S. Wiemann, J. Reinhard, A. Faissner, immunomodulatory role of the extracellular matrix 
protein tenascin- c in neuroinflammation. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 47, 1651–1660 (2019).
 50. S. Ghorbani, v. W. Yong, t he extracellular matrix as modifier of neuroinflammation and 
remyelination in multiple sclerosis. Brain 144, 1958–1973 (2021).
 51. A. Ballabio, J. S. Bonifacino, l ysosomes as dynamic regulators of cell and organismal 
homeostasis. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 21, 101–118 (2020).
 52. R. A. n ixon, t he aging lysosome: An essential catalyst for late- onset neurodegenerative 
diseases. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. Proteins Proteom. 1868, 140443 (2020).
 53. e . c uyvers, K. Sleegers, Genetic variations underlying Alzheimer's disease: evidence from 
genome- wide association studies and beyond. Lancet Neurol. 15, 857–868 (2016).
 54. S. eggert, c. t homas, S. Kins, G. hermey, t rafficking in Alzheimer's disease: Modulation of 
APP transport and processing by the transmembrane proteins lRP1, SorlA, SorcS1c, 
Sortilin, and c alsyntenin. Mol. Neurobiol. 55, 5809–5829 (2018).
 55. c. Bellenguez, F. Küçükali, i. e . Jansen, l. Kleineidam, S. Moreno-  Grau, n. Amin, A. c. naj,  
R. c ampos- Martin, B. Grenier- Boley, v. Andrade, P . A. holmans, A. Boland, v. damotte,  
S. J. van der l ee, M. R. c osta, t. Kuulasmaa, Q. Yang, i. de Rojas, J. c. Bis, A. Yaqub, i. Prokic, 
J. chapuis, S. Ahmad, v. Giedraitis, d. Aarsland, P . Garcia- Gonzalez, c. Abdelnour,  
e. Alarcón- Martín, d. Alcolea, M. Alegret, i. Alvarez, v. Álvarez, n. J. Armstrong, A. t solaki, 
c. Antúnez, i. Appollonio, M. Arcaro, S. Archetti, A. A. Pastor, B. Arosio, l. Athanasiu,  
h. Bailly, n. Banaj, M. Baquero, S. Barral, A. Beiser, A. B. Pastor, J. e. Below, P . Benchek,  
l. Benussi, c. Berr, c. Besse, v. Bessi, G. Binetti, A. Bizarro, R. Blesa, M. Boada, e. Boerwinkle, 
B. Borroni, S. Boschi, P . Bossù, G. Bråthen, J. Bressler, c. Bresner, h. Brodaty, K. J. Brookes,  
l. i. Brusco, d . Buiza- Rueda, K. Bûrger, v. Burholt, W. S. Bush, M. calero, l. B. c antwell,  
G. chene, J. chung, M. l. c uccaro, Á. carracedo, R. cecchetti, l. c ervera- carles,  
c. charbonnier, h.- h. chen, c. chillotti, S. c iccone, J. A. h. R. claassen, c. clark, e . c onti,  
A. c orma- Gómez, e. c ostantini, c. c ustodero, d. daian, M. c. dalmasso, A. daniele,  
e. dardiotis, J.- F. dartigues, P . P . de deyn, K. de Paiva l opes, l. d . de Witte, S. debette,  
J. deckert, t . del Ser, n. d enning, A. de Stefano, M. dichgans, J. diehl- Schmid,  
M. diez- Fairen, P . d. Rossi, S. d jurovic, e. duron, e. düzel, c. d ufouil, G. eiriksdottir,  
S. engelborghs, v. escott- Price, A. espinosa, M. ewers, K. M. Faber, t . Fabrizio, S. F. nielsen, 
d. W. Fardo, l. Farotti, c. Fenoglio, M. Fernández- Fuertes, R. Ferrari, c. B. Ferreira, e. Ferri,  
B. Fin, P . Fischer, t . Fladby, K. Fließbach, B. Fongang, M. Fornage, J. Fortea, t . M. Foroud,  
S. Fostinelli, n. c. Fox, e . Franco- Macías, M. J. Bullido, A. Frank- García, l. Froelich,  
B. Fulton- howard, d. Galimberti, J. M. García- Alberca, P . García- González,  
S. Garcia- Madrona, G. Garcia- Ribas, R. Ghidoni, i. Giegling, G. Giorgio, A. M. Goate,  
O. Goldhardt, d. Gomez- Fonseca, A. González- Pérez, c. Graff, G. Grande, e. Green,  
t . Grimmer, e. Grünblatt, M. Grunin, v. Gudnason, t . Guetta- Baranes, A. haapasalo,  
G. hadjigeorgiou, J. l. haines, K. l. hamilton- nelson, h. hampel, O. hanon, J. hardy,  
A. M. hartmann, l. hausner, J. harwood, S. heilmann- heimbach, S. helisalmi,  
M. t . heneka, i. hernández, M. J. herrmann, P . hoffmann, c. holmes, h. holstege,  
R. h. vilas, M. hulsman, J. humphrey, G. J. Biessels, X. Jian, c. Johansson, G. R. Jun,  
Y. Kastumata, J. Kauwe, P . G. Kehoe, l. Kilander, A. K. Ståhlbom, M. Kivipelto, A. Koivisto,  
J. Kornhuber, M. h. Kosmidis, W. A. Kukull, P . P . Kuksa, B. W. Kunkle, A. B. Kuzma, c. lage,  
e. J. laukka, l. launer, A. lauria, c.-  Y. l ee, J. l ehtisalo, O. l erch, A. lleó, W. l. Jr, O. l opez,  
A. l. de Munain, S. l ove, M. l öwemark, l. l uckcuck, K. l. l unetta, Y. Ma, J. Macías,  
c. A. Mac l eod, W. Maier, F. Mangialasche, M. Spallazzi, M. Marquié, R. Marshall,  
e. R. Martin, A. M. Montes, c. M. Rodríguez, c. Masullo, R. Mayeux, S. Mead, P . Mecocci,  
M. Medina, A. Meggy, S. Mehrabian, S. Mendoza, M. Menéndez- González, P . Mir,  
S. Moebus, M. Mol, l. Molina- Porcel, l. Montrreal, l. Morelli, F. Moreno, K. Morgan,  
t . Mosley, M. M. nöthen, c. Muchnik, S. Mukherjee, B. nacmias, t . ngandu, G. n icolas,  
B. G. nordestgaard, R. Olaso, A. Orellana, M. Orsini, G. Ortega, A. Padovani, c. Paolo,  
G. Papenberg, l. Parnetti, F. Pasquier, P . Pastor, G. Peloso, A. Pérez- cordón, J. Pérez- tur,  
P . Pericard, O. Peters, Y. A. l. Pijnenburg, J. A. Pineda, G. Piñol- Ripoll, c. Pisanu, t . Polak,  
J. Popp, d. Posthuma, J. Priller, R. Puerta, O. Quenez, i. Quintela, J. Q. t homassen,  
A. Rábano, i. Rainero, F. Rajabli, i. Ramakers, l. M. Real, M. J. t . Reinders, c. Reitz,  
d. Reyes- dumeyer, P . Ridge, S. Riedel- heller, P . Riederer, n. Roberto,  
e. Rodriguez- Rodriguez, A. Rongve, i. R. Allende, M. Rosende- Roca, J. l. Royo, e . Rubino,  
d. Rujescu, M. e. Sáez, P . Sakka, i. Saltvedt, Á. Sanabria, M. B. Sánchez- Arjona,  
F. Sanchez- Garcia, P . S. Juan, R. Sánchez- valle, S. B. Sando, c. Sarnowski, c. l. Satizabal,  
M. Scamosci, n. Scarmeas, e. Scarpini, P . Scheltens, n. Scherbaum, M. Scherer, M. Schmid, 
A. Schneider, J. M. Schott, G. Selbæk, d. Seripa, M. Serrano, J. Sha, A. A. Shadrin,  
O. Skrobot, S. Slifer, G. J. l. Snijders, h. Soininen, v. Solfrizzi, A. Solomon, Y. Song, S. Sorbi, 
O. Sotolongo- Grau, G. Spalletta, A. Spottke, A. Squassina, e. Stordal, J. P . tartan, l. tárraga, 
n. t esí, A. t halamuthu, t. t homas, G. tosto, l. t raykov, l. t remolizzo, A. tybjærg- hansen,  
A. Uitterlinden, A. Ullgren, i. Ulstein, S. valero, O. valladares, c. van Broeckhoven, J. vance, 
B. n. vardarajan, A. van der l ugt, J. van d ongen, J. van Rooij, J. van Swieten,  
R. vandenberghe, F. verhey, J.- S. vidal, J. vogelgsang, M. vyhnalek, M. Wagner, d. Wallon, 
l.- S. Wang, R. Wang, l. Weinhold, J. Wiltfang, G. Windle, B. Woods, M. Yannakoulia, h. Zare, 
Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, c. Zhu, M. Zulaica, eAdB, GR@Ace , deGeSc O, eAdi, GeRAd , demgene, 
FinnGen, AdGc, chARGe , l. A. Farrer, B. M. Psaty, M. Ghanbari, t . Raj, P . Sachdev,  
K. Mather, F. Jessen, M. A. ikram, A. de Mendonça, J. hort, M. t solaki, M. A. Pericak- vance, 
P . Amouyel, J. Williams, R. Frikke- Schmidt, J. clarimon, J.- F. deleuze, G. Rossi, S. Seshadri, 
O. A. Andreassen, M. ingelsson, M. h iltunen, K. Sleegers, G. d. Schellenberg,  
c. M. van d uijn, R. Sims, W. M. van der Flier, A. Ruiz, A. Ramirez, J.- c. lambert, new 
insights into the genetic etiology of Alzheimer's disease and related dementias. Nat. 
Genet. 54, 412–436 (2022).
 56. Y.- W. Wan, R. Al- Ouran, c. G. Mangleburg, t . M. Perumal, t . v. l ee, K. Allison, v. Swarup,  
c. c. Funk, c. Gaiteri, M. Allen, M. Wang, S. M. neuner, c. c. Kaczorowski, v. M. Philip,  
G. R. howell, h. Martini- Stoica, h. Zheng, h. Mei, X. Zhong, J. W. Kim, v. l. dawson,  
t . M. dawson, P . c. Pao, l. h. t sai, J. v. haure- Mirande, M. e. ehrlich, P . chakrabarty,  
Y. l evites, X. Wang, e. B. dammer, G. Srivastava, S. Mukherjee, S. K. Sieberts, l. Omberg,  
K. d. dang, J. A. eddy, P . Snyder, Y. chae, S. Amberkar, W. Wei, W. hide, c. Preuss, A. ergun, 
P . J. ebert, d. c. Airey, S. Mostafavi, l. Yu, h.- U. Klein, Accelerating Medicines Partnership- 
Alzheimer's disease, G. W. c arter, d. A. c ollier, t . e. Golde, A. i. l evey, d. A. Bennett,  
K. estrada, t . M. townsend, B. Zhang, e. Schadt, P . l. de Jager, n. d . Price, n. ertekin- taner, 
Z. liu, J. M. Shulman, l. M. Mangravite, B. A. l ogsdon, Meta- analysis of the Alzheimer's 
disease human brain transcriptome and functional dissection in mouse models. Cell Rep. 
32, 107908 (2020).
 57. J. Xu, S. Patassini, n. Rustogi, i. Riba- Garcia, B. d. hale, A. M. Phillips, h. Waldvogel,  
R. haines, P . Bradbury, A. Stevens, R. l. M. Faull, A. W. dowsey, G. J. S. cooper, R. d. Unwin, 
Regional protein expression in human Alzheimer's brain correlates with disease severity. 
Commun. Biol. 2, 43 (2019).
 58. c. F. Mendonca, M. Kuras, F. c. S. nogueira, i. Pla, t . hortobagyi, l. csiba, M. Palkovits,  
e. Renner, P . dome, G. Marko- varga, G. B. domont, M. Rezeli, Proteomic signatures of 
brain regions affected by tau pathology in early and late stages of Alzheimer's disease. 
Neurobiol. Dis. 130, 104509 (2019).
 59. e . c. B. Johnson, e. B. dammer, d. M. duong, l. Ping, M. Zhou, l. Yin, l. A. h igginbotham, 
A. Guajardo, B. White, J. c. t roncoso, M. t hambisetty, t . J. Montine, e. B. l ee,  
J. Q. t rojanowski, t . G. Beach, e. M. Reiman, v. haroutunian, M. Wang, e. Schadt, B. Zhang, 
d. W. dickson, n. ertekin- taner, t . e. Golde, v. A. Petyuk, P . l. de Jager, d. A. Bennett,  
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 07, 2026


===== PAGE BREAK =====

Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadk6911 (2024)     5 April 2024
Science Adv AnceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
24 of 25
t. S. Wingo, S. Rangaraju, i. hajjar, J. M. Shulman, J. J. lah, A. i. l evey, n. t. Seyfried, 
large- scale proteomic analysis of Alzheimer's disease brain and cerebrospinal fluid 
reveals early changes in energy metabolism associated with microglia and astrocyte 
activation. Nat. Med. 26, 769–780 (2020).
 60. e . c. B. Johnson, e. K. c arter, e. B. dammer, d. M. duong, e. S. Gerasimov, Y. liu, J. liu,  
R. Betarbet, l. Ping, l. Yin, G. e . Serrano, t. G. Beach, J. Peng, P . l. de Jager, v. haroutunian, 
B. Zhang, c. Gaiteri, d . A. Bennett, M. Gearing, t. S. Wingo, A. P . Wingo, J. J. lah, A. i. levey, 
n. t. Seyfried, large- scale deep multi- layer analysis of Alzheimer's disease brain reveals 
strong proteomic disease- related changes not observed at the RnA level. Nat. Neurosci. 
25, 213–225 (2022).
 61. v . Astillero- l opez, M. Gonzalez- Rodriguez, S. villar-  conde, A. Flores-  cuadrado,  
A. Martinez- Marcos, i. Ubeda- Banon, d . Saiz- Sanchez, neurodegeneration and 
astrogliosis in the entorhinal cortex in Alzheimer's disease: Stereological layer-  
specific assessment and proteomic analysis. Alzheimers Dement. 18, 2468–2480 
(2022).
 62. n. cherepanova, S. Shrimal, R. Gilmore, n- linked glycosylation and homeostasis of the 
endoplasmic reticulum. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 41, 57–65 (2016).
 63. A. tannous, G. B. Pisoni, d. n. hebert, M. Molinari, n- linked sugar- regulated protein 
folding and quality control in the eR. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 41, 79–89 (2015).
 64. B. M. Adams, n. P . canniff, K. P . Guay, i. S. B. larsen, d. n. hebert, Quantitative 
glycoproteomics reveals cellular substrate selectivity of the eR protein quality control 
sensors UGGt1 and UGGt2. eLife 9, e63997 (2020).
 65. J. c. lambert, c. A. i brahim- verbaas, d. harold, A. c. naj, R. Sims, c. Bellenguez,  
A. l. d eStafano, J. c. Bis, G. W. Beecham, B. Grenier- Boley, G. Russo, t. A. t horton- Wells,  
n. Jones, A. v. Smith, v. chouraki, c. t homas, M. A. ikram, d. Zelenika, B. n. vardarajan,  
Y. Kamatani, c. F. lin, A. Gerrish, h. Schmidt, B. Kunkle, M. l. d unstan, A. Ruiz,  
M. t. Bihoreau, S. h. choi, c. Reitz, F. Pasquier, c. c ruchaga, d. c raig, n. Amin, c. Berr,  
O. l. l opez, P . l. de Jager, v. d eramecourt, J. A. Johnston, d. evans, S. l ovestone,  
l. l etenneur, F. J. Moron, d. c. Rubinsztein, G. eiriksdottir, K. Sleegers, A. M. Goate,  
n. Fievet, M. W. huentelman, M. Gill, K. Brown, M. i. Kamboh, l. Keller,  
P . Barberger- Gateau, B. McGuiness, e. B. larson, R. Green, A. J. Myers, c. d ufouil, S. todd,  
d. Wallon, S. l ove, e. Rogaeva, J. Gallacher, P . S. George- hyslop, J. clarimon, A. lleo,  
A. Bayer, d. W. t suang, l. Yu, M. t solaki, P . Bossu, G. Spalletta, P . Proitsi, J. collinge, S. Sorbi, 
F. Sanchez- Garcia, n. c. Fox, J. hardy, M. c. d . naranjo, P . Bosco, R. clarke, c. Brayne,  
d. Galimberti, M. Mancuso, F. Matthews, european Alzheimer's disease (eAdi), Genetic 
and environmental Risk in Alzheimer's (GeRARd), Alzheimer's disease Genetic 
c onsortium (AdGc ), c ohorts for heart and Aging Research in Genomic epidemiology 
(chARGe), S. Moebus, P . Mecocci, M. del Zompo, W. Maier, h. hampel, A. Pilotto,  
M. Bullido, F. Panza, P . caffarra, B. nacmias, J. R. Gilbert, M. Mayhaus, l. lannefelt,  
h. hakonarson, S. Pichler, M. M. c arrasquillo, M. ingelsson, d. Beekly, v. Alvarez, F. Zou,  
O. valladares, S. G. Younkin, e. c oto, K. l. hamilton- nelson, W. Gu, c. Razquin, P . Pastor,  
i. Mateo, M. J. Owen, K. M. Faber, P . v. Jonsson, O. combarros, M. c. O'd onovan,  
l. B. c antwell, h. Soininen, d . Blacker, S. Mead, t. h. Mosley Jr., d . A. Bennett, t . B. harris,  
l. Fratiglioni, c. holmes, R. F. de Bruijn, P . Passmore, t. J. Montine, K. Bettens, J. i. Rotter,  
A. Brice, K. Morgan, t . M. Foroud, W. A. Kukull, d. hannequin, J. F. Powell, M. A. nalls,  
K. Ritchie, K. l. l unetta, J. S. Kauwe, e. Boerwinkle, M. Riemenschneider, M. Boada,  
M. h iltuenen, e. R. Martin, R. Schmidt, d. Rujescu, l. S. Wang, J. F. dartigues, R. Mayeux,  
c. t zourio, A. hofman, M. M. nothen, c. Graff, B. M. Psaty, l. Jones, J. l. haines,  
P . A. holmans, M. lathrop, M. A. Pericak- vance, l. J. launer, l. A. Farrer, c. M. van d uijn,  
c. van Broeckhoven, v. Moskvina, S. Seshadri, J. Williams, G. d. Schellenberg, P . Amouyel, 
Meta- analysis of 74,046 individuals identifies 11 new susceptibility loci for Alzheimer's 
disease. Nat. Genet. 45, 1452–1458 (2013).
 66. B. W. Kunkle, B. Grenier- Boley, R. Sims, J. c. Bis, v. damotte, A. c. naj, A. Boland,  
M. vronskaya, S. J. van der l ee, A. Amlie- Wolf, c. Bellenguez, A. Frizatti, v. chouraki,  
e. R. Martin, K. Sleegers, n. Badarinarayan, J. Jakobsdottir, K. l. hamilton- nelson,  
S. Moreno- Grau, R. Olaso, R. Raybould, Y. chen, A. B. Kuzma, M. hiltunen, t. Morgan,  
S. Ahmad, B. n. vardarajan, J. epelbaum, P . hoffmann, M. Boada, G. W. Beecham,  
J. G. Garnier, d. harold, A. l. Fitzpatrick, O. valladares, M. l. Moutet, A. Gerrish, A. v. Smith, 
l. Qu, d . Bacq, n. d enning, X. Jian, Y. Zhao, M. del Zompo, n. c. Fox, S. h. choi, i. Mateo,  
J. t. hughes, h. h. Adams, J. Malamon, F. Sanchez-  Garcia, Y. Patel, J. A. Brody,  
B. A. dombroski, M. c. d . naranjo, M. daniilidou, G. eiriksdottir, S. Mukherjee, d . Wallon,  
J. Uphill, t . Aspelund, l. B. c antwell, F. Garzia, d. Galimberti, e. hofer, M. Butkiewicz, B. Fin, 
e. Scarpini, c. Sarnowski, W. S. Bush, S. Meslage, J. Kornhuber, c. c. White, Y. Song,  
R. c. Barber, S. engelborghs, S. Sordon, d . voijnovic, P . M. Adams, R. vandenberghe,  
M. Mayhaus, l. A. c upples, M. S. Albert, P . P . de deyn, W. Gu, J. J. himali, d. Beekly,  
A. Squassina, A. M. hartmann, A. Orellana, d . Blacker, e. Rodriguez- Rodriguez,  
S. l ovestone, M. e. Garcia, R. S. doody, c. Munoz- Fernadez, R. Sussams, h. lin,  
t. J. Fairchild, Y. A. Benito, c. holmes, h. Karamujic- comic, M. P . Frosch, h. t honberg,  
W. Maier, G. Roshchupkin, B. Ghetti, v. Giedraitis, A. Kawalia, S. li, R. M. huebinger,  
l. Kilander, S. Moebus, i. hernandez, M. i. Kamboh, R. Brundin, J. t urton, Q. Yang,  
M. J. Katz, l. c oncari, J. l ord, A. S. Beiser, c. d . Keene, S. helisalmi, i. Kloszewska,  
W. A. Kukull, A. M. Koivisto, A. l ynch, l. tarraga, e. B. larson, A. haapasalo, B. lawlor,  
t . h. Mosley, R. B. lipton, v. Solfrizzi, M. Gill, W. t . l ongstreth Jr., t . J. Montine, v. Frisardi,  
M. diez- Fairen, F. Rivadeneira, R. c. Petersen, v. d eramecourt, i. Alvarez, F. Salani,  
A. c iaramella, e. Boerwinkle, e. M. Reiman, n. Fievet, J. i. Rotter, J. S. Reisch, O. hanon,  
c. c upidi, A. G. A. Uitterlinden, d. R. Royall, c. d ufouil, R. G. Maletta, i. de Rojas, M. Sano,  
A. Brice, R. c ecchetti, P . S. George- hyslop, K. Ritchie, M. t solaki, d. W. t suang, B. dubois,  
d. c raig, c. K. Wu, h. Soininen, d . Avramidou, R. l. Albin, l. Fratiglioni, A. Germanou,  
l. G. Apostolova, l. Keller, M. Koutroumani, S. e . Arnold, F. Panza, O. Gkatzima, S. Asthana, 
d. hannequin, P . Whitehead, c. S. Atwood, P . caffarra, h. hampel, i. Quintela, A. c arracedo, 
l. lannfelt, d . c. Rubinsztein, l. l. Barnes, F. Pasquier, l. Frolich, S. Barral, B. McGuinness,  
t . G. Beach, J. A. Johnston, J. t . Becker, P . Passmore, e. h. Bigio, J. M. Schott, t . d. Bird,  
J. d. Warren, B. F. Boeve, M. K. lupton, J. d. Bowen, P . Proitsi, A. Boxer, J. F. Powell,  
J. R. Burke, J. S. K. Kauwe, J. M. Burns, M. Mancuso, J. d. Buxbaum, U. Bonuccelli,  
n. J. c airns, A. McQuillin, c. c ao, G. livingston, c. S. c arlson, n. J. Bass, c. M. c arlsson,  
J. hardy, R. M. c arney, J. Bras, M. M. carrasquillo, R. Guerreiro, M. Allen, h. c. chui, e . Fisher, 
c. Masullo, e. A. c rocco, c. d ec arli, G. Bisceglio, M. dick, l. Ma, R. d uara,  
n. R. Graff- Radford, d. A. evans, A. hodges, K. M. Faber, M. Scherer, K. B. Fallon,  
M. Riemenschneider, d. W. Fardo, R. heun, M. R. Farlow, h. Kolsch, S. Ferris, M. l eber,  
t . M. Foroud, i. heuser, d. R. Galasko, i. Giegling, M. Gearing, M. hull, d . h. Geschwind,  
J. R. Gilbert, J. Morris, R. c. Green, K. Mayo, J. h. Growdon, t . Feulner, R. l. hamilton,  
l. e . harrell, d . drichel, l. S. honig, t . d. c ushion, M. J. huentelman, P . hollingworth,  
c. M. hulette, B. t . hyman, R. Marshall, G. P . Jarvik, A. Meggy, e. Abner, G. e. Menzies,  
l. W. Jin, G. l eonenko, l. M. Real, G. R. Jun, c. t . Baldwin, d. Grozeva, A. Karydas, G. Russo, 
J. A. Kaye, R. Kim, F. Jessen, n. W. Kowall, B. vellas, J. h. Kramer, e. vardy, F. M. laFerla,  
K. h. Jockel, J. J. lah, M. dichgans, J. B. l everenz, d. Mann, A. i. l evey, S. Pickering- Brown, 
A. P . lieberman, n. Klopp, K. l. l unetta, h. e. Wichmann, c. G. l yketsos, K. Morgan,  
d. c. Marson, K. Brown, F. Martiniuk, c. Medway, d . c. Mash, M. M. nothen, e . Masliah,  
n. M. hooper, W. c. Mcc ormick, A. daniele, S. M. Mcc urry, A. Bayer, A. n. Mcdavid,  
J. Gallacher, A. c. McKee, h. van den Bussche, M. Mesulam, c. Brayne, B. l. Miller,  
S. Riedel- heller, c. A. Miller, J. W. Miller, A. Al- chalabi, J. c. Morris, c. e . Shaw, A. J. Myers,  
J. Wiltfang, S. O'Bryant, J. M. Olichney, v. Alvarez, J. e. Parisi, A. B. Singleton, h. l. Paulson,  
J. c ollinge, W. R. Perry, S. Mead, e. Peskind, d. h. c ribbs, M. Rossor, A. Pierce, n. S. Ryan,  
W. W. Poon, B. nacmias, h. Potter, S. Sorbi, J. F. Quinn, e. Sacchinelli, A. Raj, G. Spalletta,  
M. Raskind, c. c altagirone, P . Bossu, M. d. Orfei, B. Reisberg, R. clarke, c. Reitz, A. d . Smith, 
J. M. Ringman, d. Warden, e. d. Roberson, G. Wilcock, e. Rogaeva, A. c. Bruni, h. J. Rosen, 
M. Gallo, R. n. Rosenberg, Y. Ben- Shlomo, M. A. Sager, P . Mecocci, A. J. Saykin, P . Pastor,  
M. l. c uccaro, J. M. vance, J. A. Schneider, l. S. Schneider, S. Slifer, W. W. Seeley,  
A. G. Smith, J. A. Sonnen, S. Spina, R. A. Stern, R. h. Swerdlow, M. tang, R. e. tanzi,  
J. Q. t rojanowski, J. c. t roncoso, v. M. van d eerlin, l. J. van eldik, h. v. vinters,  
J. P . vonsattel, S. Weintraub, K. A. Welsh- Bohmer, K. c. Wilhelmsen, J. Williamson,  
t . S. Wingo, R. l. Woltjer, c. B. Wright, c. e . Yu, l. Yu, Y. Saba, A. Pilotto, M. J. Bullido,  
O. Peters, P . K. crane, d. Bennett, P . Bosco, e. c oto, v. Boccardi, P . l. de Jager, A. lleo,  
n. Warner, O. l. l opez, M. ingelsson, P . deloukas, c. c ruchaga, c. Graff, R. Gwilliam,  
M. Fornage, A. M. Goate, P . Sanchez- Juan, P . G. Kehoe, n. Amin, n. ertekin- taner, c. Berr,  
S. d ebette, S. l ove, l. J. launer, S. G. Younkin, J. F. dartigues, c. c orcoran, M. A. ikram,  
d. W. dickson, G. n icolas, d. c ampion, J. t schanz, h. Schmidt, h. hakonarson, J. clarimon, 
R. Munger, R. Schmidt, l. A. Farrer, c. van Broeckhoven, M. c. O’donovan, A. l. d e Stefano, 
l. Jones, J. l. haines, J. F. d eleuze, M. J. Owen, v. Gudnason, R. Mayeux, v. escott- Price,  
B. M. Psaty, A. Ramirez, l. S. Wang, A. Ruiz, c. M. van d uijn, P . A. holmans, S. Seshadri,  
J. Williams, P . Amouyel, G. d. Schellenberg, J. c. lambert, M. A. Pericak-  vance, Alzheimer 
disease Genetics c onsortium (AdGc ), european Alzheimer’s disease initiative (eAdi), 
c ohorts for heart and Aging Research in Genomic epidemiology c onsortium (chARGe), 
Genetic and environmental Risk in Ad/d efining Genetic, Polygenic and environmental 
Risk for Alzheimer’s disease consortium (GeRAd/PeRAdeS), Genetic meta- analysis of 
diagnosed Alzheimer's disease identifies new risk loci and implicates Abeta, tau, 
immunity and lipid processing. Nat. Genet. 51, 414–430 (2019).
 67. h. c. tjondro, i. l oke, S. chatterjee, M. t haysen- Andersen, human protein 
paucimannosylation: c ues from the eukaryotic kingdoms. Biol. Rev. Camb. Philos. Soc. 94, 
2068–2100 (2019).
 68. J. Ugonotti, R. Kawahara, i. l oke, Y. Zhu, S. chatterjee, h. c. tjondro, Z. Sumer- Bayraktar,  
S. neelamegham, M. t haysen- Andersen, n- acetyl- β- d- hexosaminidases mediate the 
generation of paucimannosidic proteins via a putative noncanonical truncation pathway 
in human neutrophils. Glycobiology 32, 218–229 (2022).
 69. e . drummond, S. nayak, A. Faustin, G. Pires, R. A. h ickman, M. Askenazi, M. c ohen,  
t . haldiman, c. Kim, X. han, Y. Shao, J. G. Safar, B. Ueberheide, t . Wisniewski, Proteomic 
differences in amyloid plaques in rapidly progressive and sporadic Alzheimer's disease. 
Acta Neuropathol. 133, 933–954 (2017).
 70. e . drummond, G. Pires, c. MacMurray, M. Askenazi, S. nayak, M. Bourdon, J. Safar,  
B. Ueberheide, t . Wisniewski, Phosphorylated tau interactome in the human Alzheimer's 
disease brain. Brain 143, 2803–2817 (2020).
 71. e . drummond, t . Kavanagh, G. Pires, M. Marta- Ariza, e. Kanshin, S. nayak, A. Faustin,  
v. Berdah, B. Ueberheide, t . Wisniewski, t he amyloid plaque proteome in early onset 
Alzheimer's disease and down syndrome. Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 10, 53 (2022).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 07, 2026


===== PAGE BREAK =====

Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 10, eadk6911 (2024)     5 April 2024
Science Adv AnceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
25 of 25
 72. t . M. Maguire, K. c. Breen, A decrease in neural sialyltransferase activity in Alzheimer's 
disease. Dementia 6, 185–190 (1995).
 73. A. c. naj, G. Jun, G. W. Beecham, l. S. Wang, B. n. vardarajan, J. Buros, P . J. Gallins,  
J. d. Buxbaum, G. P . Jarvik, P . K. crane, e. B. larson, t. d. Bird, B. F. Boeve,  
n. R. Graff- Radford, P . l. de Jager, d. evans, J. A. Schneider, M. M. carrasquillo,  
n. ertekin- taner, S. G. Younkin, c. cruchaga, J. S. Kauwe, P . nowotny, P . Kramer, J. hardy,  
M. J. huentelman, A. J. Myers, M. M. Barmada, F. Y. demirci, c. t. Baldwin, R. c. Green,  
e. Rogaeva, P . S. George- hyslop, S. e. Arnold, R. Barber, t. Beach, e. h. Bigio, J. d . Bowen,  
A. Boxer, J. R. Burke, n. J. c airns, c. S. c arlson, R. M. c arney, S. l. c arroll, h. c. chui,  
d. G. clark, J. c orneveaux, c. W. c otman, J. l. c ummings, c. d ec arli, S. t. deKosky,  
R. diaz- Arrastia, M. dick, d . W. dickson, W. G. ellis, K. M. Faber, K. B. Fallon, M. R. Farlow,  
S. Ferris, M. P . Frosch, d. R. Galasko, M. Ganguli, M. Gearing, d. h. Geschwind, B. Ghetti,  
J. R. Gilbert, S. Gilman, B. Giordani, J. d. Glass, J. h. Growdon, R. l. hamilton, l. e . harrell,  
e. head, l. S. honig, c. M. hulette, B. t. h yman, G. A. Jicha, l. W. Jin, n. Johnson,  
J. Karlawish, A. Karydas, J. A. Kaye, R. Kim, e. h. Koo, n. W. Kowall, J. J. lah, A. i. l evey,  
A. P . lieberman, O. l. l opez, W. J. Mack, d. c. Marson, F. Martiniuk, d . c. Mash, e . Masliah, 
W. c. Mcc ormick, S. M. Mcc urry, A. n. Mcdavid, A. c. McKee, M. Mesulam, B. l. Miller,  
c. A. Miller, J. W. Miller, J. e. Parisi, d. P . Perl, e. Peskind, R. c. Petersen, W. W. Poon,  
J. F. Quinn, R. A. Rajbhandary, M. Raskind, B. Reisberg, J. M. Ringman, e. d. Roberson,  
R. n. Rosenberg, M. Sano, l. S. Schneider, W. Seeley, M. l. Shelanski, M. A. Slifer,  
c. d . Smith, J. A. Sonnen, S. Spina, R. A. Stern, R. e. tanzi, J. Q. t rojanowski, J. c. t roncoso,  
v. M. van d eerlin, h. v. vinters, J. P . vonsattel, S. Weintraub, K. A. Welsh- Bohmer,  
J. Williamson, R. l. Woltjer, l. B. c antwell, B. A. dombroski, d. Beekly, K. l. l unetta,  
e. R. Martin, M. i. Kamboh, A. J. Saykin, e. M. Reiman, d. A. Bennett, J. c. Morris,  
t. J. Montine, A. M. Goate, d. Blacker, d. W. t suang, h. hakonarson, W. A. Kukull,  
t. M. Foroud, J. l. haines, R. Mayeux, M. A. Pericak-  vance, l. A. Farrer, G. d . Schellenberg, 
c ommon variants at MS4A4/MS4A6e, cd2AP , cd33 and ePhA1 are associated with 
late- onset Alzheimer's disease. Nat. Genet. 43, 436–441 (2011).
 74. i. Sugimoto, S. Futakawa, R. Oka, K. Ogawa, J. d . Marth, e. Miyoshi, n. taniguchi,  
Y. hashimoto, S. Kitazume, Beta- galactoside alpha2,6- sialyltransferase i cleavage by 
BAce1 enhances the sialylation of soluble glycoproteins. A novel regulatory mechanism 
for alpha2,6- sialylation. J. Biol. Chem. 282, 34896–34903 (2007).
 75. J. W. dennis, K. S. lau, M. d emetriou, i. R. nabi, Adaptive regulation at the cell surface by 
n-  glycosylation. Traffic 10, 1569–1578 (2009).
 76. S. U. l ee, A. Grigorian, J. Pawling, i. J. chen, G. Gao, t. Mozaffar, c. McKerlie, M. d emetriou, 
n-  glycan processing deficiency promotes spontaneous inflammatory demyelination and 
neurodegeneration. J. Biol. Chem. 282, 33725–33734 (2007).
 77. R. Kleene, M. Schachner, Glycans and neural cell interactions. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 5, 
195–208 (2004).
 78. h. Schachter, Paucimannose n-  glycans in Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila 
melanogaster. Carbohydr. Res. 344, 1391–1396 (2009).
 79. l. Yu, Z. huo, J. Yang, h. Palma-  Gudiel, P . A. Boyle, J. A. Schneider, d. A. Bennett, J. Zhao, 
human brain and blood n-  glycome profiling in Alzheimer's disease and Alzheimer's 
disease- related dementias. Front. Aging Neurosci. 13, 765259 (2021).
 80. M. Schneider, e. Al- Shareffi, R. S. haltiwanger, Biological functions of fucose in mammals. 
Glycobiology 27, 601–618 (2017).
 81. n. ding, h. n ie, X. Sun, W. Sun, Y. Qu, X. liu, Y. Yao, X. liang, c. c. chen, Y. li, human serum 
n-  glycan profiles are age and sex dependent. Age Ageing 40, 568–575 (2011).
 82. Y. v. Karpievitch, A. R. dabney, R. d . Smith, normalization and missing value imputation 
for label- free lc- MS analysis. BMC Bioinformatics 13, S5 (2012).
 83. M. Askenazi, t . Kavanagh, G. Pires, B. Ueberheide, t. Wisniewski, e. drummond, 
c ompilation of reported protein changes in the brain in Alzheimer's disease. Nat. 
Commun. 14, 4466 (2023).
 84. K. K. l eung, G. M. Wilson, l. l. Kirkemo, n. M. Riley, J. J. c oon, J. A. Wells, Broad and 
thematic remodeling of the surfaceome and glycoproteome on isogenic cells 
transformed with driving proliferative oncogenes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 117, 
7764–7775 (2020).
 85. Z. chen, Q. Yu, Q. Yu, J. Johnson, R. Shipman, X. Zhong, J. huang, S. Asthana, c. c arlsson, 
O. Okonkwo, l. li, i n- depth site- specific analysis of n-  glycoproteome in human 
cerebrospinal fluid and glycosylation landscape changes in alzheimer's disease. Mol. Cell. 
Proteomics 20, 100081 (2021).
 86. J. Zhu, Y. h. lin, K. A. dingess, M. Mank, B. Stahl, A. J. R. heck, Quantitative longitudinal 
inventory of the n-  glycoproteome of human milk from a single donor reveals the highly 
variable repertoire and dynamic site- specific changes. J. Proteome Res. 19, 1941–1952 
(2020).
 87. M. W. Bern, Y. J. Kil, t wo- dimensional target decoy strategy for shotgun proteomics. J. 
Proteome Res. 10, 5296–5301 (2011).
 88. M. e. Ritchie, B. Phipson, d. Wu, Y. hu, c. W. law, W. Shi, G. K. Smyth, limma powers 
differential expression analyses for RnA- sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic Acids 
Res. 43, e47 (2015).
 89. K. Kammers, R. n. c ole, c. t iengwe, i. Ruczinski, detecting significant changes in protein 
abundance. EuPA Open Proteom. 7, 11–19 (2015).
 90. J. d. Storey, Qvalue: Q- value estimation for false discovery rate control. (2015).
 91. S. Babicki, d. Arndt, A. Marcu, Y. liang, J. R. Grant, A. Maciejewski, d . S. Wishart, 
heatmapper: Web- enabled heat mapping for all. Nucleic Acids Res. 44, W147–W153 
(2016).
 92. P . Shannon, A. Markiel, O. Ozier, n. S. Baliga, J. t . Wang, d. Ramage, n. Amin,  
B. Schwikowski, t . ideker, cytoscape: A software environment for integrated models of 
biomolecular interaction networks. Genome Res. 13, 2498–2504 (2003).
 93. S. Wieczorek, F. combes, c. lazar, Q. Giai Gianetto, l. Gatto, A. d orffer, A. M. hesse,  
Y. coute, M. Ferro, c. Bruley, t . Burger, dAPAR & ProStaR: Software to perform statistical 
analyses in quantitative discovery proteomics. Bioinformatics 33, 135–136 (2017).
 94. G. csárdi, t . nepusz, t he igraph software package for complex network research. InterJ. 
Complex Syst. 1695, 1–9 (2006).
 95. S. horvath, J. d ong, Geometric interpretation of gene coexpression network analysis. 
PLOS Comput. Biol. 4, e1000117 (2008).
 96. P . langfelder, S. horvath, eigengene networks for studying the relationships between 
co- expression modules. BMC Syst. Biol. 1, 54 (2007).
 97. Y. Benjamini, Y. hochberg, controlling the false discovery rate: A practical and powerful 
approach to multiple testing. J. R. Stat. Soc. Series B Methodol. 57, 289–300 (1995).
 98. Y. Perez- Riverol, J. Bai, c. Bandla, d . Garcia- Seisdedos, S. hewapathirana,  
S. Kamatchinathan, d . J. Kundu, A. Prakash, A. Frericks- Zipper, M. eisenacher, M. Walzer,  
S. Wang, A. Brazma, J. A. vizcaino, t he PRide database resources in 2022: A hub for 
mass spectrometry- based proteomics evidences. Nucleic Acids Res. 50, d543–d552 
(2022).
Acknowledgments: We thank M. Gearing for providing postmortem brain tissue samples with 
demographic and neuropathological information. We are grateful to the emory center for 
neurodegenerative disease Brain Bank donors and their families for their invaluable 
contribution to this study. S.P . is grateful for the endowment of the Rochelle and Max levit 
chair in the neurosciences. Funding: t his work was supported in part by nih/national 
institute on Aging grants RF1AG057965 (to l.l.), R21AG082333 (to l.l.), RF1AG065282 (to 
l.- S.c.), and R01AG079836 (to l.l.). t he emory c enter for neurodegenerative disease Brain 
Bank was supported in part by nih grants P50 AG025688 and P30 nS055077. Author 
contributions: conceptualization: l.l. and Q.Z. Methodology: Q.Z., c.M., and l.l. i nvestigation: 
Q.Z., c.M., and l.l. Formal analysis: Q.Z. and l.l. visualization: Q.Z. and l.l. Resources: l.l., 
l.- S.c., and S.P . Supervision: l.l., l.- S.c., and S.P . Funding acquisition: l.l., l.- S.c., and S.P . 
Writing—original draft: l.l., Q.Z., and l.- S.c. Writing—review and editing: l.l., Q.Z., l.- S.c., S.P ., 
and c.M. Competing interests: t he authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
Data and materials availability: t he mass spectrometry glycoproteomics data have been 
deposited to the ProteomeXchange consortium via the PRide (98) partner repository with the 
dataset identifier PXd045001. All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are 
present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials.
Submitted 5 September 2023 
Accepted 5 March 2024 
Published 5 April 2024 
10.1126/sciadv.adk6911
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 07, 2026


===== PAGE BREAK =====

Human brain glycoform coregulation network and glycan modification alterations
in Alzheimer’s disease
Qi Zhang, Cheng Ma, Lih-Shen Chin, Sheng Pan, and Lian Li
Sci. Adv. 10 (14), eadk6911.  DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.adk6911
View the article online
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/sciadv.adk6911
Permissions
https://www.science.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Use of this article is subject to the Terms of service
Science Advances (ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 1200 New York Avenue
NW, Washington, DC 20005. The title Science Advances is a registered trademark of AAAS. 
Copyright © 2024 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim
to original U.S. Government Works. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on April 07, 2026
