Guo et al. 2025 | https://doi.org/10.34133/research.0678
1
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Toti-N-glycan Recognition Enables Universal 
Multiplexed Single-Nucleus RNA Sequencing
Yiran  Guo1†, Liang  Zhang2†, Xing  Zhao3†, Chang  Xu4†, Yiyang  Li4, 
Zhaolong  Gao1, Gaozhi  Ou5, Peng  Chen1, Wenshan  Zheng4, Hao  Pei4*,  
Xin  Liu1*, Bi-Feng  Liu1*, and Yiwei  Li1*
1Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of MOE and Hubei Bioinformatics & Molecular Imaging Key 
Laboratory, Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology - The 
Key Laboratory for Biomedical Photonics of MOE at Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China. 2College of Sports Medicine, 
Wuhan Sports University, Wuhan 430079, China. 3John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied 
Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge 021238, MA, USA. 4MobiDrop (Zhejiang), Tongxiang, Zhejiang 
314500, China. 5School of Sports, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan 430074, China.
*Address correspondence to: yiweili@hust.edu.cn (Y.L.); bfliu@mail.hust.edu.cn (B.-F.L.); xliu@mail.hust.
edu.cn (X.L.); haopei@mobidrop.com (H.P.)
†These authors contributed equally to this paper.
Sample barcoding-based multiplex single-cell and single-nucleus sequencing (sc/sn-seq) offers substantial 
advantages by reducing costs, minimizing batch effects, and identifying artifacts, thereby advancing 
biological and biomedical research. Despite these benefits, universal sample barcoding has been hindered 
by challenges such as inhomogeneous expression of tagged biomolecules, limited tagging affinity, and 
insufficient genetic insertion. To overcome these limitations, we developed Toti-N-Seq, a universal sample 
multiplex method, by tagging Toti-N-glycan on cell surfaces or nuclear membranes via our engineered 
streptavidin–Fbs1 GYR variant fusion protein, which could be used not only for sc-seq but also for sn-seq. 
Instead of targeting lipids or proteins, we focused on targeting the ubiquitous N-glycans found on any 
species with accessible membranes, which minimizes the exchange between barcoded samples and avoids 
biased barcoding. Our technology can be broadly applied to multiple species and nearly all eukaryotic cell 
types, with an overall classification accuracy of 0.969 for sc-seq and of 0.987 for sn-seq. As a demonstration 
with clinical human peripheral blood mononuclear cells, our Toti-N-Seq achieved rapid one-step sample 
preparation (<3 min) for easily scaling up while keeping high fidelity of sample ratios, removing artifacts, 
and detecting rare cell populations (~0.5%). Consequently, we offer a versatile platform suitable for various 
cell types and applications.
Introduction
 The dream of biologists to map the gene expression of every 
individual cell in a living organism has been partially realized 
through recent advances in single-cell technology [ 1 – 3 ]. The 
throughput of single-cell analysis has evolved from examining 
a single cell to hundreds of cells and now reaches a range of 103﻿ 
to 105﻿ cells or nuclei, thanks to technologies based on microw-
ells, combinatorial indexing, and droplet microfluidics [ 4 – 9 ]. 
However, with approximately 36 trillion cells in a male body 
and 28 trillion in a female body, even descriptive analysis of 
living systems demands further scaling and substantially higher 
throughput [ 10 ].
 The increasing demands from the pharmaceutical industry, 
clinical research, and developmental biology [ 11 – 14 ] have 
required single-cell and single-nucleus sequencing (sc/sn-seq) 
to be integrated with spatiotemporal information [ 15 – 19 ], 
combinational perturbations [ 20 – 22 ], patient identities [ 23 , 24 ], 
and experimental replicates [ 25 , 26 ] to minimize intersample 
variability and uncover correlations. The scaling of sc/sn-seq 
can be elegantly achieved by multiplexing samples prior to pro-
cessing, utilizing barcoding through natural genetic variation, 
chemical labeling, oligonucleotide (oligo)-labeled antibodies, 
oligo-labeled lipid anchors, or genetic cell labeling [ 27 – 29 ]. 
Sample multiplexing involves labeling cells with sample-specific 
barcodes before pooling, allowing the sequencer to identify 
the origins of transcripts [ 30 ]. These methods have achieved 
increased throughput, eliminated batch effect, removed arti-
facts, and reduced costs [ 25 , 26 ]. Among these methods, genetic 
cell labeling suffers from varied efficiency between cell types 
and long-term preprocessing [ 27 – 29 ], which may also intro-
duce “side-effect” perturbations similar to chemical labeling 
[ 25 , 27 – 29 ]. Antibody-based and lipid-based approaches are 
simple and generally applicable to a wide range of single-cell 
Citation: Guo Y, Zhang L, Zhao X, Xu C, 
Li Y, Gao Z, Ou G, Chen P, Zheng W, 
Pei H, et al. Toti-N-glycan Recognition 
Enables Universal Multiplexed Single-
Nucleus RNA Sequencing. Research 
2025;8:Article 0678. https://doi.
org/10.34133/research.0678
Submitted 24 January 2025  
Revised 19 March 2025  
Accepted 27 March 2025  
Published 22 April 2025
Copyright © 2025 Yiran Guo et al.  
Exclusive licensee Science and 
Technology Review Publishing House. 
No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works. Distributed under a Creative 
Commons Attribution License  
(CC BY 4.0).
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org on June 21, 2026

Guo et al. 2025 | https://doi.org/10.34133/research.0678
2
applications and platforms. However, the success of using anti-
bodies for sample multiplexing depends on the ubiquitous 
expression of the target protein across cell types, which is chal-
lenging to be found to fit all nuclei and cell types, thus limiting 
the sample-agnostic universal application of multiplex sc/sn-
seq [ 25 , 31 – 33 ]. In comparison, lipid-anchor-based methods 
can be widely applied across species and cell types, but they 
suffer weak and dynamic affinity between barcodes and lipids 
on cell/nucleus surfaces, which eventually lead to potential off-
target effects and cross-contamination during preparation 
[ 26 , 33 ]. Overall, these methods tend to have a preference for 
either sc-seq or sn-seq [ 33 ].
 To address these issues, we focus on tagging another biomole-
cule, N-glycan, which is universally presented on the surfaces of 
eukaryotic cells across various types and species [ 34 – 36 ]. N-glycans 
are a category of oligosaccharides that are covalently attached to 
proteins at asparagine (Asn) residues via an N-glycosidic bond [ 35 ]. 
They play a crucial role as information carriers on eukaryotic cell 
surfaces. There are many types of N-glycans [ 37 ]. Although the 
combination ratios of the types of N-glycans vary, the total amount 
of N-glycans remains roughly consistent [ 38 ]. Here, we engineered 
a Toti-N-glycan-recognizing protein with oligonucleotides that tags 
all types of N-glycans nonselectively, enabling universal sc-RNA 
sequencing (sc-RNA-seq) (Fig.  1 A). Remarkably, our Toti-N-glycan 
barcodes are also capable of tagging nuclei; the sequencing assays 
confirm tight labeling on nuclei with an overall classification accu-
racy (OCA) of 0.987. Our Toti-N-glycan barcode further enables 
efficient removing of cell doublets, resulting in a doublet ratio below 
0.04% for sc-seq and below 0.02% for sn-seq. With enhanced tag-
ging efficiency and minimized crosstalk, our technology can pre-
serve rare/minor subpopulations (~0.5% in population) within the 
multiplexed samples, allowing for high-throughput analysis with-
out losing detailed cellular information in practical applications. 
Results
Toti-N-Seq overview
 Toti-N-Seq labeled cells or nuclei with DNA barcodes by recog-
nizing the Toti-N-glycan on the membrane (Fig.  1 A). N-Glycan 
associates with the membrane through covalently attaching to 
membrane proteins (Fig.  1 B). These N-glycans, present on both 
nuclear and cell membranes, serve as anchors for DNA barcodes 
(Table  S1 ), facilitating multiplex sequencing (multiplex-seq). To 
enable selective and universal tagging of N-glycan, we adapted 
a technology developed for N-glycan enrichment [ 39 , 40 ]. Our 
method takes advantage of the natural protein Fbs1, which func-
tions within the ubiquitin-mediated degradation system to rec-
ognize the common core pentasaccharide motif (Man3GlcNAc2) 
of N-glycans [ 41 ]. Compared to wild-type Fbs1, the Fbs1 GYR 
variant (Fg) exhibits higher and unbiased recovery of all types 
Fig. 1. The concept of Toti-N-Seq for sample-multiplexed single-cell and single-nucleus sequencing (sc/sn-seq). (A) Schematic illustration of the workflow of Toti-N-Seq for sample-
multiplexed sc/sn-seq. Created in BioRender. Zhao, X. (2025) https://BioRender.com/4n6oqs1. (B) Schematic illustration of engineered streptavidin–Fbs1 GYR variant (Stv–Fg) 
fusion protein for sample tagging. (C) Mass spectrometry showed the capability of engineered Stv–Fg for unbiased enrichment of N-glycan in cells. (D) Fluorescent imaging 
assays demonstrated the capability of engineered Stv–Fg fusion protein for unbiased and fluorescent cell tagging. (E) Fluorescent imaging assays demonstrated the capability of 
engineered Stv–Fg fusion protein for unbiased and fluorescent nucleus tagging. PCR, polymerase chain reaction; RT, reverse transcription; cDNA, complementary DNA; NGS, next-
generation sequencing; mRNA, messenger RNA; BSA, bovine serum albumin; GFP, green fluorescent protein; Dil, 1,1′-dioctadecyl-3,3,3′,3′-tetramethylindocarbocyanine perchlorate.
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org on June 21, 2026

Guo et al. 2025 | https://doi.org/10.34133/research.0678
3
of N-glycans [ 39 , 40 ]. To explore the Fg’s capability in cell/
nucleus tagging, we engineered a streptavidin–Fg fusion protein 
(Stv–Fg), gaining more flexibility to link to biotin-modified 
groups, such as biotin–green fluorescent protein and biotin–
oligonucleotide barcodes (Fig.  1 B and Fig.  S1 ). This allows us to 
link fluorescent barcodes or DNA barcodes to Fg via streptavi-
din, which then recognizes and labels all types of N-glycans on 
cell or nuclear membranes.
 A Toti-N-Seq sample barcode includes an oligonucleotide 
sequence with a 3′ polyA capture sequence, a 6-bp sample 
index, and a 5′ polymerase chain reaction handle necessary for 
hybridization and library construction. After following the 
conventional steps of droplet-based sc/sn-seq, transcripts and 
Toti-N-Seq sample barcodes are linked to a common cell- or 
nucleus-specific barcode during reverse transcription, which 
enables sample demultiplexing. Toti-N-Seq sample barcodes 
and complementary DNA libraries are separated by size selec-
tion before library construction, enabling pooled sequencing 
at user-defined proportions (Fig.  1 A). 
Biochemical evaluation of the tagging performance 
of Toti-N-glycan barcodes
 We evaluated whether the Stv–Fg fusion protein labels intact 
N-glycans unbiasedly with minimal exchange between samples 
during sample preparation. First, N-glycans from standard gly-
coprotein (RNase B) were enriched using our engineering Stv–
Fg fusion protein and analyzed via mass spectrometry. With 
our engineered Stv–Fg fusion protein, all 5 N-glycans from 
RNase B were accurately detected amid a complex background 
of biomacromolecules (Fig.  1 C). The results demonstrated that 
our engineered Stv–Fg fusion protein could selectively and 
unbiasedly recognize N-glycans in a complex solution, which 
paves the way for labeling cells and nuclei for multiplex sample 
sequencing.
 To further explore the labeling capability of our engineered 
Stv–Fg fusion protein in living cells and nuclei, we linked the 
engineered Stv–Fg fusion protein with biotin–green fluorescent 
protein to form a Toti-N-glycan fluorescent barcode and then 
incubated it with freshly isolated cells and nuclei (Fig.  1 D and 
E). For cell membrane tagging, we compared the staining effi-
ciency of our Toti-N-glycan fluorescent barcode with DiI 
(1,1′-dioctadecyl-3,3,3′,3′-tetramethylindocarbocyanine per-
chlorate, a dye that labels cell membranes by tagging lipids in 
red). The Toti-N-glycan fluorescent barcode clearly stained the 
cell membrane and colocalized with DiI at cell boundaries. 
Remarkably, the Toti-N-glycan fluorescent barcode was more 
efficient in labeling cell membranes than DiI in 2 aspects: the 
Toti-N-glycan fluorescent barcode uniformly labeled every 
single cell, while DiI did not accurately label the membranes 
of some cells (Fig.  1 D); when we overlapped Toti-N-glycan 
fluorescent barcode labeling with DiI, DiI exhibited more label-
ing on intracellular lipid structures (Fig.  1 D). For nucleus tag-
ging, we co-stained isolated nuclei with both our Toti-N-glycan 
fluorescent barcode and Hoechst. The imaging results showed 
clear nuclear boundary structures and the encapsulation of 
Hoechst-labeled DNA inside the Toti-N-glycan fluorescent 
barcode-labeled nuclear membrane (Fig.  1 E). Together, these 
results demonstrate the capability of our engineered Stv–Fg 
fusion protein to tag both cell membranes and nuclear mem-
branes, allowing its application in imaging and beyond.
 Next, we used flow cytometry to evaluate whether our Toti-
N-glycan fluorescent barcode could tag multiple cell types from 
different species. For 4 types of cells and nuclei from humans 
and mice—NIH 3T3 (mouse embryonic fibroblasts), HEK293T 
(human embryonic kidney cells), MDA-MB-231 (human breast 
adenocarcinoma cells), and H1975 (human non-small-cell lung 
cancer cells)—our Toti-N-glycan fluorescent barcode (Stv–Fg–
Cy5 [cyanine 5] and Stv–Fg–PE [phycoerythrin]) successfully 
tagged all cell types (Fig.  2 A and B). Additionally, we conducted 
a titration assay to determine the concentration required for 
efficient tagging of either cell membranes or nuclei (Fig.  S2 ). 
By labeling cells and nuclei with varying concentrations of the 
Toti-N-glycan fluorescent barcode, we found that efficient 
labeling could be achieved at concentrations as low as 37.5 pM 
for cell membranes and 75.0 pM for nuclei (Fig.  S2 ). Sample 
barcode exchange is one of the issues in multiplex sc/sn-seq. 
To test whether there is crosstalk after mixing 2 labeled popula-
tions of cells with dyes, we firstly incubated the mixed samples 
for different times and analyzed their signal afterward (Fig.  2 C). 
The results showed that there was no obvious contamination 
between samples after mixing for up to 90 min (Fig.  2 C). To 
further test whether our strategy minimizes exchange between 
samples, we mixed 2 labeled samples and use cell flow-cyto-
metric analysis to separate them. The results showed that 2 
populations of differentially labeled cells (Fig.  2 D) or nuclei 
(Fig.  2 E) could be easily separated by flow cytometry. We also 
compared the 2 populations with different incubation times 
(~0, 45, and 90 min) after mixing. For cell membrane tagging, 
within 45 min of incubation, only ~1% of cells were either nega-
tively labeled or dual labeled (Fig.  2 D). For nucleus tagging, 
even after 90 min of mixing, both the negatively labeled and 
dual-labeled populations remained below 2% (Fig.  2 E). Since 
the cells’ encapsulation with compartments typically takes less 
than 15 min for various platforms [ 1 , 2 ], our Toti-N-glycan 
barcode provides sufficient high fidelity for tagging different 
samples during the library construction period. 
Toti-N-glycan barcodes for the sc/sn-seq of  
pooled samples
 We validated the sample multiplexing capacity of Toti-N-Seq 
through proof-of-concept experiments using either whole cells 
or nuclei of HEK293T cells and NIH 3T3 cells (Fig.  3 and Fig. 
 S3 ). Toti-N-glycan DNA sample barcodes were formed by link-
ing biotinylated single-stranded DNA (biotin–ssDNA) to our 
Stv–Fg fusion protein. All samples were trypsinized, tagged 
with Toti-N-glycan DNA barcodes, and pooled before droplet 
encapsulation in a commercial droplet-based microfluidic 
device (MobiNova). 
 After sequencing, we analyzed a final sc/sn-RNA-seq dataset 
containing 80,000 nuclei (Fig.  3 ) and 100,000 cells (Fig.  S3 ). 
We identified clusters in gene expression space according to 
different genes for HEK293T cells as well as for NIH 3T3 cells 
(Fig.  3 B). Projection of Toti-N-glycan DNA sample barcode 
classifications onto gene expression space for the 2 sampled cell 
types revealed that the Toti-N-glycan DNA sample barcode 
successfully demultiplexed each sample (Fig.  3 A and B). Indeed, 
when comparing the signature differentially expressed genes 
(DEGs) of NIH 3T3 cells and HEK293T cells, we found that 
the Tag 1 demultiplexed cells expressed only DEGs associated 
with HEK293T cells, while Tag 2 demultiplexed cells expressed 
only DEGs associated with NIH 3T3 cells (Fig.  3 C). Clustering 
the cells by their signature DEGs efficiently grouped them into 
2 clusters of HEK293T cells and 2 clusters of NIH 3T3 cells 
(Fig.  3 D).
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org on June 21, 2026
